Threats Presented by Climate Change
Debate on 24 January 2019
Summary
On 24 January 2019, the House of Lords is scheduled to debate a motion moved by Lord Teverson
(Liberal Democrat) on the “threats presented by climate change”.
This briefing considers risks arising from climate change—identified as increasing at both global and
national level—and summarises recent coordination efforts and programmes intended to mitigate them.
International bodies charged with examining the scientific evidence have identified risks associated with:
•
•
•
•

changing weather;
rising sea levels;
land and marine-based biodiversity and ecosystems; and
human systems such as health, security and the economy.

Negotiations on how to meet these challenges have continued, most recently at a United Nations
summit in Katowice, Poland, held in December 2018.
The UK has identified several priority climate risk areas including:
•
•
•
•
•
•

flooding and coastal change;
health, wellbeing and productivity;
water supply shortages;
natural ecosystems, soils and biodiversity;
food production and trade; and
new and emerging pests and diseases.

A selection of recommended reading, including detailed evidence reports, is identified at the end of the
briefing for further information on this broad and evolving subject.
Introduction
It is widely held within the scientific and international policy-making communities that emissions
generated from human activity have affected the Earth’s climate in recent decades. The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)—the United Nations body charged with assessing
the science related to climate change—has concluded that there is “clear” evidence that the climate has
warmed since the 1950s and that the dominant cause of such temperature increases is “extremely
likely” to have been greenhouse gas emissions resulting from human activity. In a 2014 report
summarising the scientific evidence available at that time, the IPCC stated:
Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and since the 1950s, many of the observed changes
1
Thomas Brown | 17 January 2019

2

are unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean have warmed, the
amounts of snow and ice have diminished, and [the] sea level has risen.
Anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions have increased since the pre-industrial era, driven largely
by economic and population growth, and are now higher than ever. This has led to atmospheric
concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide that are unprecedented in at least
the last 800,000 years. Their effects, together with those of other anthropogenic drivers, have
been detected throughout the climate system and are extremely likely to have been the
dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century.1
In respect of the scientific consensus behind climate change—widely defined as a large-scale, long-term
shift in the planet’s weather patterns and average temperatures, including climate system warming—the
US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) has observed that “97% of climate scientists
agree that climate-warming trends over the past century are very likely due to human activities, and
most of the leading scientific organisations worldwide have issued public statements endorsing this
position”.2 It should be noted, however, that questions relating to climate change, including in respect of
causes, remedies or its very existence as a phenomenon, remain contested by some observers and have
become increasingly politicised in recent years. ‘Climate scepticism’ spans a range of viewpoints, and
includes individuals or groups of people who are sceptical that the world is warming; the influence of
humans in climate warming; the pace and extent of the impacts of climate change; and/or whether
urgent action and spending are necessary to address changes in the climate.3
Climate Change as a Global Challenge
The very nature of climate change means that its effects are global in scope. In 2015, an international
agreement was reached at the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP) of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in which 195 nations committed to “‘holding the increase in
the global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to
limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels”.4 This agreement is widely known as
the Paris agreement after the city in which the COP21 meeting was held. Following the adoption of the
Paris agreement, the UNFCCC invited the IPCC to produce a special report on the environmental and
societal effects of a global temperature rise of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.5
The IPCC agreed and published this special report in October 2018. It noted that human activities were
estimated to have caused approximately 1°C of global warming above pre-industrial levels and predicted
that, on current trends, this was likely to reach 1.5°C between 2030 and 2052.6 The authors of the
report used available scientific evidence and models to identify the impacts that such an elevated rise
would have globally. They noted that the level of future climate-related risks for natural and human
systems would depend on the “magnitude and rate of warming, geographic location, levels of
development and vulnerability, and on the choices and implementation of adaptation and mitigation
options”.7 Having noted this caveat, the report identified a series of risk factors associated with a 1.5°C
global warming model, in line with the ambitions outlined in the Paris agreement.
Differences in Regional Climate Characteristics
First, the IPCC report identified that a warmer climate was likely to increase the risk of extreme
weather in different regions. According to the authors of the report, regional climate differences in a
1.5°C global warming scenario would include higher mean temperatures in most land and ocean regions;
hot extremes in most inhabited regions; heavy precipitation in several regions; and the probability of

3

drought and precipitation deficits in some regions. In particular, the number of hot days was projected
to increase in most land regions, with the highest increases in regions located in the tropics.8
Global Sea Level Rise
Second, the report noted that an increase in global temperatures was likely to lead to higher sea levels.
The authors cited projections suggesting that a 1.5°C rise in temperatures would result in a 0.26 to 0.77
metre global mean sea level rise by 2100. Sea levels were likely to continue to rise beyond this date, and
marine ice sheet instability in Antarctica and/or an irreversible loss of the Greenland ice sheet “could
result in multi-metre rise in sea level over hundreds to thousands of years”. The authors contended that
increased warming “amplifies the exposure of small islands, low-lying coastal areas and deltas to the risks
associated with sea level rise for many human and ecological systems, including increased saltwater
intrusion, flooding and damage to infrastructure”.9
Land-based Biodiversity and Ecosystems
Third, the report cited estimates, based on studies of 105,000 species, that 6% of insects, 8% of plants
and 4% of vertebrates were projected to lose over half of their climatically determined geographic range
in a 1.5°C global warming scenario. Other noted risks from increased temperatures for land-based
biodiversity and ecosystems included a higher risk of forest fires; spread of invasive species; and
permafrost thaw. Also noted as a potential risk was the transformation of ecosystems from one type to
another—with high-latitude tundra and boreal forests identified as at risk of “climate change-induced
degradation and loss”.10
Marine Biodiversity, Fisheries, and Ecosystems
Fourth, the report noted that warming of 1.5°C was expected to result in continued increases in ocean
temperature as well as associated increases in ocean acidity and decreases in ocean oxygen levels. In a
1.5°C warming scenario, evidence cited suggested that:
•
•
•
•

one sea ice-free Arctic summer would be likely per century;
the ranges of many marine species would move to higher latitudes;
an increase in damage to many marine ecosystems could be expected, including coral reefs
and other coastal ecosystems; and
ocean acidification caused by increasing carbon dioxide concentrations would “amplify” the
adverse effects of warming, including the relative abundance and/or survival of a broad range
of species.

In addition, the authors argued that climate change was likely to continue affecting fisheries and
aquaculture. They cited a model suggesting that the global fisheries catch could decrease by “about
1.5 million tonnes” should global temperatures rise by 1.5°C.11
Human Systems
Fifth, the report observed that climate-related risks to health, livelihoods, food security, water supply,
human security and economic growth were projected to increase in a 1.5°C global warming scenario.
The authors added that disadvantaged and vulnerable populations, some indigenous peoples, and local
communities dependent on agricultural or coastal livelihoods were at a “disproportionately higher risk

4

of adverse consequences”. Additionally, “poverty and disadvantage” were expected to increase in some
populations as global temperatures increased. Other noted risks included:
•
•
•
•

potential increases in heat-related morbidity and mortality;
potential net reductions in yields of crops such as maize, rice and wheat and potential
reductions in the nutritional quality of rice and wheat;
climate change-induced increases in water stress; and
economic growth-related risks, particularly for countries in the tropics and southern
hemisphere subtropics.12

Limits to Adaptation and Adaptive Capacity
Lastly, the report noted that a wide range of adaptation options were available to reduce risks in
particular areas. These included:
•
•
•

ecosystem restoration and biodiversity management for risks associated with natural and
managed ecosystems;
coastal defences as a tool to mitigate against rising sea levels; and
options including efficient irrigation and green infrastructure to address issues relating to
health, livelihoods, food, water, and economic growth.

However, the authors noted that there was evidence to suggest that limits to adaptive capacity existed
in a 1.5°C warming scenario, and that such limits, though varying by sector, became “more pronounced
at higher levels of warming”.13
Two further IPCC special reports—focused on how climate change affects the oceans and cryosphere
and the use of land, respectively—are expected to be published later this year.14
Ongoing International Response
The October 2018 IPCC report concluded that limiting global warming to 1.5°C with “no or limited
overshoot” would require “rapid and far-reaching transitions in energy, land, urban and infrastructure
(including transport and buildings) and industrial systems”.15 Global net human-caused emissions of
carbon dioxide would need to fall by about 45% from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching “net zero” around
2050.16 The report added that to achieve this “systems transitions” would have to be “unprecedented in
terms of scale, but not necessarily in terms of speed, and imply deep emissions reductions in all sectors,
a wide portfolio of mitigation options and a significant upscaling of investments in those options”.17
However, the report noted that the international community was not on track to limit warming to
1.5°C on current plans. It observed forecasts suggesting that those mitigation measures currently
announced to be in place up to 2030 were likely to lead to significantly higher global warming of about
3°C by 2100, with further warming continuing afterwards.18
At the most recent COP—COP24 held in Katowice, Poland, between 2 and 15 December 2018—
signatories to the UNFCCC sought to secure agreement on how international action to mitigate climate
change could be strengthened.19 The conference concluded with the adoption by all parties to the
convention, including the United States and China, of a single rulebook that will apply to all countries in
relation to emissions reporting and climate targets to facilitate practical implementation of the Paris
agreement to limit the increase in global average temperatures to below 2°C above pre-industrial
levels.20 Claire Perry, Minister of State for Energy and Clean Growth at the Department for Business,

5

Energy and Industrial Strategy, summarised the UK Government’s assessment of this outcome in a
written statement following the conference:
COP24 was an important moment, representing the culmination of three years of negotiations and
following shortly after the publication of a landmark scientific report from the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change that highlighted the severe consequences of failing to limit global
warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.
In the negotiations we succeeded in securing our main objectives by delivering an operational
rulebook to drive genuine climate action, creating a level-playing field, while allowing for flexibility
and support for those countries that need it, in light of capacity. Inevitably there is still work to be
done, particularly on carbon markets, but the overall picture is of a rulebook that enables the Paris
Agreement to be taken forward in practice, marking a move from negotiation to implementation.21
In a statement issued at the conclusion of COP24, Lord Stern of Brentford (Crossbench), chair of the
Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of
Economics and Political Science, commented that the conference had “ultimately succeeded in its crucial
primary task of agreeing the so-called rule book for the Paris agreement”. He added that, in his view,
countries “must now get on with the crucial implementation of their contributions to the Paris
agreement” and plan how to “increase their reductions in emissions to allow them to submit stronger
commitments” ahead of the expected COP26 meeting in 2020. He argued that the progress the world
was currently making was “inadequate given the scale and urgency of the risks we face”.22
The UN Secretary General, António Guterres, characterised the COP24 agreement on a rulebook to
implement the Paris agreement as the “basis for a transformative process which will require
strengthened ambition from the international community”.23 Mr Guterres will host a climate summit in
September 2019 to facilitate international efforts to mitigate climate change.24
Climate Change as a Domestic Challenge
As well as being global in scope, climate change can affect particular regions and countries in different
ways. The UK Government’s view is that there is “clear evidence to show that climate change is
happening” and that the UK is “already affected by rising temperatures”.25
The Climate Change Act 2008 sets out the framework in which the UK approaches climate change.26
The act commits the Government to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% of 1990 levels
by 2050 through a system of carbon budgets that restrict the volume of greenhouse gases that can be
legally emitted over a five-year period.27 The act also established the independent Committee on
Climate Change, which advises the Government on how to reduce greenhouse gas emissions over
time.28 The committee is currently chaired by Lord Deben (Conservative). Baroness Brown of
Cambridge (Crossbench) serves as the committee’s deputy chair and chairs the separate adaptation subcommittee, which provides independent advice on preparing for and adapting to climate change.29 In
June 2018, the committee cautioned that although emissions had fallen by 43% from 1990 levels, the
Government was “not on course to meet the legally binding fourth and fifth carbon budgets”.30
In July 2016, the Committee on Climate Change published a synthesis report produced by its adaptation
sub-committee, then chaired by Lord Krebs (Crossbench), to inform a government climate change risk
assessment then due in January 2017.31 The synthesis report concluded that changes to the UK climate
were “likely to include periods of too much or too little water, increasing average and extreme
temperatures and sea level rise”.32 The report identified 56 individual risks and opportunities arising

6

from global warming, organised within four urgency categories.33 In particular, it identified six “interrelated” and “urgent” climate change risks facing the UK. These priority risks, together with the
committee’s headline observation and urgency rating for each, are set out below.34
Priority Risk Area
Flooding and coastal change risks
to communities, businesses and
infrastructure
Risks to health, wellbeing and
productivity from high
temperatures
Risk of shortages in the public
water supply, and for agriculture,
energy generation and industry,
with impacts on freshwater
ecology

Risks to natural capital, including
terrestrial, coastal, marine and
freshwater ecosystems, soils and
biodiversity

Risks to domestic and
international food production
and trade
New and emerging pests and
diseases, and invasive non-native
species, affecting people, plants
and animals

Headline Observation
“The impacts of flooding and coastal change in
the UK are already significant and expected to
increase as a result of climate change”.
“Heatwaves in the UK like that experienced in
2003 are expected to become the norm in
summer by the 2040s”.
“Climate change is projected to reduce the
amount of water in the environment that can be
sustainably withdrawn whilst increasing the
demand for irrigation during the driest months.
At the same time the growing population will
create additional demands on already stretched
resources in some parts of the country”.
“Climate change presents a substantial risk to
the UK’s native wildlife and to the vital goods
and services provided by natural capital,
including food, timber and fibre, clean water,
carbon storage, and the cultural benefits
derived from landscapes”.
“The affordability of food for the UK population
is subject to domestic and international risks
affecting production and prices”.
“The impacts of new and emerging pests and
diseases are potentially high for otherwise
healthy people, animals and plants. The warmer,
wetter conditions expected with climate change
will allow some pests and diseases to extend
their range”.

Conclusion
More action needed
(highest urgency rating)
More action needed
(highest urgency rating)
More action needed
(highest urgency rating)

More action needed
(highest urgency rating)

More action needed
(highest urgency rating)
Research priority
(second-highest urgency
rating)

Government Policy
In January 2017, the Government published a climate change risk assessment in line with its obligations
under the Climate Change Act 2008. This drew on the report commissioned from the Committee on
Climate Change’s adaptation sub-committee. The Government endorsed the six priority risk areas
identified in this earlier report and broadly endorsed the urgency level given to individual risks identified,
with the exception of some relating to food security.35 It provided details of actions being taken in each
risk area, adding that further details of adaptation measures would be published in 2018.36
Following the 2017 climate change risk assessment, in July 2018 the Government published its most
recent national adaptation programme (NAP) and strategy for climate adaptation reporting. This
document set out over 100 “key actions” for the 2018–2023 period, including actions intended to:
•
•
•

protect ecosystems, such as ancient and native woodland and marine areas;
establish or maintain various environmental schemes and networks; and
update climate change-related plans and guidance, amongst many other measures.

7

The Government said that the document was “intended to communicate the extent, nature and
immediacy of different climate risks and what we are doing to address them, which will help inform a
more mature debate on how we adapt as a society”.37
The Committee on Climate Change’s adaptation sub-committee is expected to publish a report
evaluating the Government’s progress on implementing the NAP in June 2019.38 However, in an article
published on the same day as the NAP was published, Kathryn Brown, Head of Adaptation at the
Committee on Climate Change Secretariat, contended that the NAP appeared to be only a “partial
plan” and that it was “hard to say at this stage” whether the programme was “sustainable and
effective”.39 She added:
The main risks we have highlighted—flooding and coastal change, high temperatures, water
shortages and many others—are centre-stage in the opening pages of the new NAP. But only
some of the relevant urgent risks are dealt with in the list of actions in the report. Of the 56 risks
and opportunities we have previously identified, a quick count shows that 27 are missing from the
list of actions, including 16 urgent risks.
Diving into the content, we have previously raised the risks to the UK from climate change
impacts abroad. But there are no actions in the NAP to help manage these risks, with the
exception of an honourable mention of the Food Security Strategy. Another key gap is around
actions to manage the transition period ahead of the withdrawal of ‘Flood Re’, which helps people
who live in flood risk areas to get affordable home insurance. The implications of removing this
scheme are profound for those living in flood risk areas. And in many other cases the actions the
Government identifies in response to the risks are not new: many are based on work that has
been underway for several years. In particular, actions to reduce the risks to people from
overheating in homes, which was one of the highest priority risks identified in the [2017] climate
change risk assessment, are absent.40
In a speech delivered in November 2018 to mark the launch of the Met Office’s UK climate projections
2018 analysis tool, Michael Gove, Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs,
commented further on the impact of climate change on everyday life and the Government’s climaterelated plans.41 He referred to the UK climate projections tool showing that, in a high emission scenario,
average summer temperatures could be up to 5.4°C warmer across the UK by 2070. The Environment
Agency has stated that such an increase would be likely to lead to an increased risk of drought and an
increase in heat-related morbidity and mortality rates, amongst other effects.42 The projections had also
shown that average summer rainfall could decrease by up to 47%, while winters could be up to 4.2°C
warmer and there could be up to 35% more precipitation in winter, resulting in flooding and other
issues, by the same year.43 Mr Gove stated that flood defence work, amongst other activity, had been
informed by such projections. In respect of internationally coordinated action, he added that the UK
was “leading international efforts on climate resilience” ahead of the UN climate summit in 2019.
The Government has commissioned the Committee on Climate Change to produce a new evidence
report, due to be published in 2021, to support the next climate change risk assessment. This study is
expected to be supported by new research, including projects on future water availability; flooding; how
climate-related risks interact; and how behavioural change can affect climate risks and opportunities.44
Leaving the European Union
In 2017, the House of Lords European Union Committee observed that UK climate change policy had,
in recent years, “become increasingly enmeshed in EU policy”.45 For example, the UK participates in the

8

EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) set up in 2005.46 Both the UK and EU are parties to the
UNFCCC and the Paris agreement.47 However, it is not yet clear whether the UK will continue to
participate in EU climate mitigation initiatives such as the EU ETS following its withdrawal from the EU,
and to what extent the UK and EU will cooperate on other climate change-related policies and
mitigation mechanisms in the future.48
Further Information
•
•
•
•
•
•

1

United Nations, ‘Climate Change’, accessed 15 January 2019; and ‘Climate Change: A Global
Issue—Major Reports’, accessed 15 January 2019
IPCC, ‘Reports’, accessed 15 January 2019
Committee on Climate Change, ‘Publications’, accessed 15 January 2019; and ‘Implications of
the Vote to Leave the EU’, accessed 15 January 2019
House of Commons Library, Brexit: Energy and Climate Change, 9 November 2018
House of Lords Library, Leaving the European Union: UK Climate Change Policy, 15 June 2017
House of Lords European Union Committee, Brexit: Environment and Climate Change,
14 February 2017, HL Paper 109 of session 2016–17; and Government Response, April 2017

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report—Headline Statements from the Summary
for Policymakers, 5 November 2014, p 1. Bold in original. See also: IPCC, Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report—Summary for
Policymakers, 2014.
2
Met Office, ‘What is Climate Change?’, accessed 14 January 2019; and NASA Global Climate Change, ‘Evidence: Climate
Change—How Do We Know?’, 13 December 2018.
3
See, for example: James Painter, Poles Apart: The International Reporting of Climate Scepticism, Reuters Institute for the Study
of Journalism, November 2011, p 1.
4
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C—Frequently Asked Questions, 2018, p 5.
5
ibid.
6
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C—Summary for Policymakers, 2018, p 6.
7
ibid, p 7.
8
ibid, p 9. These risk factors are subject to differing levels of confidence.
9
ibid, pp 9–10.
10
ibid, p 10.
11
ibid, pp 10–11.
12
ibid, pp 11–12.
13
ibid, p 12.
14
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ‘Summary for Policymakers of IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of
1.5°C Approved by Governments’, 8 October 2018; ‘The Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate’, accessed 14 January
2019; and ‘Climate Change and Land’, accessed 14 January 2019.
15
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C—Summary for Policymakers, 2018, p 17.
16
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ‘Summary for Policymakers of IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of
1.5°C Approved by Governments’,
8 October 2018.
17
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C—Summary for Policymakers, 2018, p 17.
18
ibid, p 20.
19
United Nations Climate Change, ‘Katowice Climate Change Conference: December 2018’, accessed 14 January 2019; and
House of Commons, ‘Written Statement: UNFCCC Twenty Fourth Conference of Parties—Update’, 20 December 2018,
HCWS1231.
20
COP24 Katowice 2018, ‘Success of COP24: We have the Katowice Rulebook’, 15 December 2018; and Leslie Hook, ‘Deal
Struck at Climate Talks to put Paris Pact into Action’, Financial Times (£), 15 December 2018. US President Donald Trump
has stated that he intends to withdraw the US from the Paris agreement, but this can only take effect from late 2020 (Brad
Plumer, ‘Climate Negotiators Reach an Overtime Deal to Keep Paris Pact Alive’, New York Times, 15 December 2018). The
IPCC special report on 1.5°C warming was not unanimously adopted at COP24 due to opposition from the United States,
Russia, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait (Matt McGrath, ‘Climate Change: COP24 Fails to Adopt Key Scientific Report’, BBC News,
8 December 2018).

9

21

House of Commons, ‘Written Statement: UNFCCC Twenty Fourth Conference of Parties—Update’, 20 December 2018,
HCWS1231.
22
LSE Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, ‘Nicholas Stern Comments on the Outcome of
COP24’, 16 December 2018.
23
United Nations, ‘Katowice Climate Conference’, accessed 14 January 2019.
24
United Nations, ‘UN Climate Summit 2019’, accessed 14 January 2019.
25
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, ‘Climate Change Explained’, 31 July 2018.
26
Committee on Climate Change, ‘UK Regulations: Climate Change Act’, accessed 15 January 2019; and LSE Grantham
Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, ‘10 Years of the UK Climate Change Act’, 30 March 2018.
27
Committee on Climate Change, ‘UK Regulations: Climate Change Act’, accessed 15 January 2019; and House of Lords
Library, Leaving the European Union: UK Climate Change Policy, 15 June 2017, pp 1–2.
28
Committee on Climate Change, ‘About the Committee on Climate Change’, accessed 15 January 2019; and HM
Government, Climate Change Act 2008: Explanatory Notes, 26 November 2008, pp 1–2.
29
Committee on Climate Change, ‘Members of the Committee on Climate Change’, accessed 15 January 2019; and
‘Members of the Adaptation Committee’, accessed 15 January 2019.
30
Committee on Climate Change, Reducing UK Emissions: 2018 Progress Report to Parliament, June 2018, pp 12–14.
31
Committee on Climate Change, UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Synthesis Report—Priorities for the Next Five Years,
July 2016. National summaries were produced for England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland alongside the evidence
report: Committee on Climate Change, ‘National Summaries’, accessed 15 January 2019.
32
Committee on Climate Change, ‘New Report Provides Authoritative Scientific Assessment of Climate Change Risks to
UK’, 12 July 2016.
33
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017, January 2017, p 9.
34
Committee on Climate Change, UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017: Synthesis Report—Priorities for the Next Five Years,
July 2016, pp 4–5. Note: “More action needed” was defined as meaning that “new, stronger or different government policies
or implementation activities—over and above those already planned—are needed to reduce long-term vulnerability to
climate change”. “Research priority” was defined as meaning that “research is needed to fill significant evidence gaps or
reduce the uncertainty in the current level of understanding in order to assess the need for additional action”.
35
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, UK Climate Change Risk Assessment 2017, January 2017, pp 3 and 10.
36
ibid, p 21.
37
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, National Adaptation Programme and Third Strategy for Climate
Adaptation Reporting, July 2018, HC1403 of session 2017–19, p iii. See also ‘Annex 2: Detailed Actions Log’.
38
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, National Adaptation Programme and Third Strategy for Climate
Adaptation Reporting, July 2018, HC1403 of session 2017–19, p v.
39
Kathryn Brown, ‘The New National Adaptation Programme: Hit or Miss?’, Committee on Climate Change, 19 July 2018.
40
ibid.
41
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, ‘Michael Gove Speech on UK Climate Change Projections’,
26 November 2018; and ‘Most Detailed Picture Yet of Changing Climate Launched’, 26 November 2018.
42
Environment Agency, Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation, November 2018.
43
Met Office, ‘UK Climate Projections’, 26 November 2018.
44
Committee on Climate Change, ‘CCC to Advise the Government on its Third Assessment of UK Climate Change Risks’,
21 December 2018.
45
House of Lords European Union Committee, Brexit: Environment and Climate Change, 14 February 2017, HL Paper 109 of
session 2016–17, p 3.
46
European Commission, ‘EU Emissions Trading System’, accessed 16 January 2019.
47
United Nations Climate Change, ‘United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland’ and ‘European Union’, accessed
16 January 2019.
48
House of Commons Library, Brexit: Energy and Climate Change, 9 November 2018, p 35.

___________________________________________________________________________________
House of Lords Library briefings are compiled for the benefit of Members of the House of Lords and their
personal staff, to provide impartial, politically balanced briefing on subjects likely to be of interest to Members of
the Lords. Authors are available to discuss the contents of the briefings with the Members and their staff but
cannot advise members of the general public.
Any comments on briefings should be sent to the Head of Research Services, House of Lords
Library, London SW1A 0PW or emailed to purvism@parliament.uk.

