DEBATE PACK
Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

Climate justice

By Sara Priestley
Nikki Sutherland

Contents
This pack has been prepared ahead of the debate to be held in Westminster Hall
at 2.30pm on Tuesday 4 February 2020 on climate justice. The debate will be
opened by Nadia Whittome MP.

1.
1.1
1.2
1.3

Climate justice
2
Overview
2
Brief history
3
Use in UK Government /
Parliament
4

2.

News items

7

3.

Press releases

9

4.

Parliamentary
material
Debates
PQs

18
18
19

The House of Commons Library prepares a briefing in hard copy and/or online for
most non-legislative debates in the Chamber and Westminster Hall other than
half-hour debates. Debate Packs are produced quickly after the announcement of
parliamentary business. They are intended to provide a summary or overview of
the issue being debated and identify relevant briefings and useful documents,
including press and parliamentary material. More detailed briefing can be
prepared for Members on request to the Library.
www.parliament.uk/commons-library | intranet.parliament.uk/commons-library | papers@parliament.uk | @commonslibrary

2

Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

1. Climate justice
1.1 Overview
Climate justice is a movement which sees climate change and its
solutions as an issue which should focus on human rights, development
and equity. It also has a strong focus on the historical responsibility for
greenhouse gas emissions.
The Mary Robinson Foundation explains climate justice as follows:
Climate justice links human rights and development to achieve a
human-centred approach, safeguarding the rights of the most
vulnerable people and sharing the burdens and benefits of climate
change and its impacts equitably and fairly. Climate justice is
informed by science, responds to science and acknowledges the
need for equitable stewardship of the world’s resources. 1

In September 2013 the International Institute for Environment and
Development (IIED) published a briefing Climate justice and international
development: policy and programming which summarised the term as
follows:
Climate justice recognises the development paradox that those
who contributed least to greenhouse gas emissions will be most
affected by climate change.
Governments need a sound and workable theory of climate justice
that draws on the political theory of justice, on antecedents in
environmental and social justice, and on how climate justice links
to ideas of developmental justice.
Environmental justice has three components: equitably distributed
environmental risk; recognition for people’s diverse needs and
experiences; and participation in the political processes that create
and manage environmental policy. 2

There are a number of international organisations and groups
campaigning on climate justice. For example, Friends of the Earth
Europe campaigns for climate justice and Greenpeace International
campaigns for climate justice. Each of these organisations may have a
slightly different interpretation or definition of what “climate justice”
means.
Within the UK, a climate justice fund was launched by the Scottish
Government in 2012 and ran until 2017. More recently, there has been
discussion on ensuring a “just transition” to a low carbon / net zero
future and the Welsh Government has set up a “Climate Just Advisory
Group” to focus on this issue; 3 while the UK Government has
announced that HM Treasury will lead a review into the costs of
decarbonisation to look how such costs are distributed in the longer

1
2

3

Mary Robinson Foundation, Principles of Climate Justice [accessed 3 February 2020]
IIED Briefing, Climate justice and international development: policy and
programming, September 2013
Welsh Government, Written Statement: Committee on Climate Change advice on
long-term emissions target, 2 May 2019

Climate justice 3

term. More information on this is available in the Library Briefing Paper
on Net Zero in the UK (16 December 2019).

1.2 Brief history
In 2000, the first Climate Justice Summit took place in the Hague at the
same time as the Sixth UNFCCC Conference of the Parties (COP6) in the
Netherlands. 4 Following this, the Bali Principles of Climate Justice were
launched at the Earth Summit in Bali in June 2002, and endorsed by a
range of environmental, development and indigenous organisations.
The Principles included the recognition of the “ecological debt” of
developed countries for their greenhouse gas emission; holding fossil
fuel companies liable for greenhouse gas and local pollutants; the right
of all to access to affordable and sustainable energy and a call for
affected communities play a leading role in national and international
processes to address climate change. 5
In 2004 the Durban Group for Climate Justice was formed and in 2007
the global coalition Climate Justice Now! was founded.
In 2010, the Mary Robinson Foundation - Climate Justice was set up
with the vision that “by 2020 global justice and equity will underpin a
people-centred, developmental approach to advancing climate justice
and more effectively addressing the impacts of climate change”. 6
In 2012, the Scottish Government launched a Climate Justice Fund in
which it defined the climate justice as follows:
Climate justice is a people-centered, human rights approach,
which shares the benefits of equitable global development and
the burdens of climate change fairly, and builds trust between
developed and developing countries

More information on the fund, its achievements and funding allocations
is available on the Scottish Government webpage on the Climate Justice
Fund.
The Joseph Roundtree Foundation (JRF) brief on Climate Justice: The
science and the evidence published in 2014 also provides further
background and history, and discusses the evidence base supporting the
concept. It concluded that this was an issue that needed to focus
equally on current and future generations:
Climate justice is not only a question of ensuring that nobody is
unfairly impacted by climate change now: it also requires
recognition that future generations have rights too. This is a
concept that remains unacknowledged in prevailing legal systems
and demands a comprehensive rethinking of the balance between
risks, rights and responsibilities.
Mandy Meikle, a researcher with the Centre for Climate Justice,
pointed out that assessing the detrimental effects of climate
change on vulnerable groups involves making projections about
the future. For this reason, such effects are not considered
4

5
6

Guardian, The first climate justice summit: a pie in the face for the global north, 16
April 2014 [accessed 18 July 2019]
Bali Principles of Justice, 29 August 2002
Mary Robinson Foundation, Mission and vision [accessed 18 July 2019]

4

Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

violations of human rights within current legal systems: the people
whose rights are infringed might not yet have been born.
This prompted one participant to suggest there should be an
‘ombudsman for future generations’ to act as an advocate for
those most at risk from environmental crisis.

For a more detailed review the JRF published a Climate Change and
Social Justice: An Evidence Review in February 2014.
In December 2018, the People’s Demands for Climate Justice (signed by
292,000 individuals and 366 organisations) called upon government
delegates at COP24 in Poland comply with a list of six climate justice
demands:
•

Keep fossil fuels in the ground.

•

Reject false solutions that are displacing real, people-first solutions
to the climate crisis.

•

Advance real solutions that are just, feasible, and essential.

•

Honour climate finance obligations to developing countries.

•

End corporate interference in and capture of the climate talks.

•

Ensure developed countries honour their “Fair Shares” for largely
fuelling this crisis.

A World Forum on Climate Justice was held in Glasgow in June 2019
(organised by Elsevier in partnership with the Glasgow Caledonian
University Centre for Climate Justice), including an address from Rt Hon
Nicola Sturgeon MSP.

1.3 Use in UK Government / Parliament
Sustainable Development Goals
The Sustainable Development Goals were approved at the UN in
September 2015 and include 17 goals to be achieved by 2030. Goal 13
relates to climate action: to take urgent action to combat climate
change and its impacts although does not specifically reference “climate
justice”. The UK’s national review of the sustainable development goals,
which is a report on the implementation on the SDGs by the UK so far,
provides the following information on action taken across the UK in
relation to the topic of climate justice:
•

The very poorest are likely to be hit hardest and first by the
impacts of climate change. The UK’s International Climate
Finance (ICF) directs resources to both adaptation and
mitigation to reduce vulnerability to shocks while reducing
global emissions. Under the International Development Act
(Gender Equality) 2014 the UK will prioritise the needs of
women and girls in its development spending.

•

The Scottish Government’s Climate Challenge Fund has
provided 1,097 grants totalling more than £101 million to
658 communities to support their move to low carbon
living. The projects themselves cover activities that help
deliver Goal 13 such as increasing the energy efficiency of
community buildings, food growing, cutting waste, and the
expansion of active and sustainable transport options.

Climate justice 5

Projects aim to improve the climate literacy of their
communities and must have a measurable carbon emissions
reduction.
•

The Welsh Government will establish a climate justice
advisory group to explore how the transition away from a
fossil fuel-based economy to a low carbon future could
impact on Welsh industries and the communities, to
collectively develop measures to decarbonise to a low
carbon economy that is fair and maximises well-being
opportunities for all. 7

Further information on the Sustainable Development Goals is available
in the Library Insight: SDGs: how is the UK performing? and the Library
briefing paper: UK Voluntary National Review on the SDGs (6 June
2019).

Select Committees
The International Development Committee published a report on UK aid
for combating climate change (May 2019) which included a section on
Climate Compatible Development and Climate Justice. The Report
quoted the then Energy Minister (Claire Perry) responding to the
question of whether the UK Government had considered adopting a
“climate justice” approach:
The language that governs us more is “leave no one behind”,
because there are issues of transition in developed countries too;
you have tens of thousands of coalminers in Poland who are
worried about what they will do as the country moves away from
coal. 8

The Committee went on to conclude and recommend:
In terms of developing policies and designing programmes, the
concepts of climate compatible development and climate justice
provide helpful guidelines for ensuring that climate finance brings
maximum benefits for addressing both the causes and impacts of
climate change whilst promoting sustainable development. The

Government should explicitly adopt these approaches and be
guided by them in policy development and programme design. 9

The Government response was published on 1 August 2019 and
“partially agreed” with the Committee’s recommendation as follows:
Government response: Partially agree
The UK aid supports sustainable development that is compatible
with tackling the causes and impacts of climate change. The Prime
Minister committed at the G20 to aligning all UK ODA with the
objectives of the Paris Agreement.
Trying to disentangle and address the precise contribution various
factors make to poverty and the challenges faced by the poor
however—as sometimes implied by those who argue for the
concept of climate justice—is difficult, and the point is to provide
effective help. Effective sustainable development is best done in
partnership with governments and communities, producing strong
7

8
9

HM Government, Voluntary National Review of progress towards the Sustainable
Development Goals, June 2019
Para 67
Para 69

6

Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

development strategies that take account of all factors and risks,
including climate change.
This is why we prefer to frame this as a commitment to leave no
one behind, in line with the UN led 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development.
When disasters strike, the UK has demonstrated that we are ready
to help. The UK is the world’s second largest humanitarian donor,
doubling funding for humanitarian assistance from £484 million in
2009 to £1.1 billion in 2014, rising to £1.4 billion in 2017. Finding
ways to cut the impact and costs of disasters is a major stream of
work in DFID including in the run-up to the UN Climate Action
Summit in September. We are pleased to be co-leading work on
building resilience, recognising how important that is, especially
for the poorest communities most vulnerable to the impact of
climate change.
Where appropriate ICF programmes also seek to incorporate
nature based solutions For example, programmes which protect
mangrove systems or promote sustainable forestry can not only
increase the resilience of local populations to extreme weather
events, but also preserve and enhance biodiversity and provide
stable, environmentally sustainable jobs for the future. 10

10

International Development Committee, Twelfth Special Report, UK aid for
combating climate change: Government Response to the Committee’s Eleventh
Report, 1 August 2019

Climate justice 7

2. News items
Ecologist
We need climate justice
8 January 2020
https://theecologist.org/2020/jan/08/we-need-climate-justice
Independent
Landmark ruling that Holland must cut emissions to protect
citizens from climate change upheld by supreme court
21 December 2019
https://www.independent.co.uk/environment/holland-emissions-climatechange-supreme-court-urgenda-dutch-co2-a9256346.html
Independent
Fossil fuel firms 'could be sued' for climate change

Filipino human rights committee finds world's biggest oil companies
have legal and moral responsibilities to act, as Greta Thunberg says
children's rights being violated
9 December 2019
https://www.independent.co.uk/environment/cop25-madrid-climatechange-greta-thunberg-fossil-fuel-lawsuit-a9239601.html
Guardian
'Racism dictates who gets dumped on': how environmental
injustice divides the world

Five luminaries explain the concept of 'environmental justice' and reveal
why, alongside the climate crisis, it is one of the most pressing issues of
our time
21 October 2019
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2019/oct/21/what-isenvironmental-injustice-and-why-is-the-guardian-covering-it

8

Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

Guardian
Why the world needs an IMF for the climate crisis

Just like after 1945, a new dawn of international bodies is required –
this time to protect and empower the global south
4 October 2019
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/oct/04/imf-climatecrisis-global-south
Telegraph
Worldwide climate strike led by group demanding Britain pay
'reparations' for being first to industrialise
20 September 2019
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2019/09/20/climate-strike-led-groupdemanding-britain-pay-reparations-first/

Climate justice 9

3. Press releases
Climate Action Network International
´Immediately shift investments from fossil fuels into renewables
and nature protection and restoration,´ civil society said to the
World Economic Forum (WEF) participants.
January 23, 2020

Immediately shift investments from fossil fuels into renewables and
nature protection and restoration, civil society said to government, bank
and business leaders convening in Davos for the World Economic Forum
(WEF).
For the first time, the latest edition of the World Economic Forum’s
(WEF) Global Risk Report identifies failure to mitigate and adapt to
climate change as the greatest risk the world faces in the short and long
term (10 years).
It took the destruction of forests, farmland, animals and peoples’
livelihoods in Australia and the Amazon and a devastating year of
extreme weather events including typhoons and cyclones that killed
thousands and ravaged Africa and Southeast Asia for the Forum´s
network of business leaders, academics and NGOs to join the chorus in
sounding the alarm on the climate emergency.
Yet, key speakers at the meeting came across completely out of tune
with the WEF´s main topic this year: ‘Climate change and building a
cohesive, inclusive and sustainable economy’. Although the USA is the
second largest global emitter of greenhouse gases, President Donald
Trump delivered a re-election speech instead of focusing on what his
government will do to tackle climate change, the world´s greatest
threat.
Additionally, Greenpeace International highlighted in a new report that
24 banks, regularly represented at Davos, have provided US$1.4 trillion
to the fossil fuel industry since the adoption of the Paris Agreement in
2015 through to the end of 2018.
The report also looks at how pension funds and insurance companies,
whose CEOs go to Davos, have been propping up fossil fuels. In
response to President Trump’s speech, Greenpeace International
Executive Director Jennifer Morgan said, “It seems to escape the
President that no money can be made on a dead planet - there can be
no jobs, no economic growth.”
Against this backdrop, 2019 marked a series of summits that exposed
the brazen lack of political will by large emitters to listen to the rising
calls from scientists and people to act on the global emergency. These
include the UN Secretary General’s Climate Action Summit in New York
and the UN Conference (COP25) in Madrid.

10 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

Despite the highest ever carbon pollution by fossil fuels in 2018 and
2019 and three scientific reports in the last two years, delivered by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), highlighting the
best and newest science on potentially devastating impacts on nature
and people, governments of rich nations try to muddle through. Added
to that, millions of people, particularly youth flooded the streets of
many cities, demanding climate and social justice to transform the
present system. Yet highly polluting and rich governments still failed to
deliver commitments to raise climate ambition and action to limit
dangerous climate impacts.
While in 2018 the IPCC Special Report on 1.5°C stipulated that limiting
global warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial would require rapid, farreaching and unprecedented changes in all spheres of society, the UN
Production Gap report released in December 2019 showed that
governments are not committing to what they signed up for in Paris in
2015. They are, in fact, planning to produce about 50% more fossil
fuels by 2030 than would be consistent with limiting global warming to
2°C levels and 120% more than would be consistent with limiting
warming to 1.5°C.
The report makes clear that participants in Davos hold direct
responsibility in tackling the climate crisis as it says that the “continued
expansion of fossil fuel production is underpinned by ambitious national
plans, government subsidies and other forms of public finance.”
Ironically, in the days leading to this year’s WEF where VIPs, royalty and
others flocked in private jets to celebrate the Forum´s 50th anniversary
and discuss climate change in Davos, Oxfam released its “Time to
Care” report. The report makes clear that global wealth is increasingly
founded on inequality. It concludes that just over 2,000 individual
billionaires control more money than 60 percent of the world’s poorest
population. This wealth is generated through the unpaid labor of the
poorest women who are also on the front line of climate impacts in
vulnerable countries.
In light of all this, civil society, supported by Greta Thunberg and Bank
of England Governor Mark Carney, demands that the world´s most
influential business and political leaders convening in Davos immediately
halt investments in fossil fuel exploration and extraction, end fossil fuel
subsidies and completely divest investment in fossil fuels.
Representatives of banks, companies, governments and other
institutions currently participating in the WEF must respond to the
emergency they acknowledge and build a cohesive and sustainable
economy by investing in the energy transition and supporting the
sustainable management of nature to achieve resilience.
The wealth owned by only just over 2,000 people is equivalent to 30
times the global annual investments into renewables. This shows how
easy it would be to triple investments in renewables annually and start
responding to the emergency.
Climate Action Network (CAN) Executive Director Tasneem Essop said:

Climate justice 11

In what is a first, the WEF Global Risk Report this year identifies
climate change as the greatest global risk. This is encouraging, but
we would need to see real and meaningful actions to address this
risk. This would require the powerful elite; political leaders, CEO’s
and other decision makers who gather in Davos, to take actions in
line with the science, to heed the UN Production Gap Report,
listen to the call of the people and immediately stop all
investments in fossil fuel exploration and production. The WEF
needs to take a stand and end the social license of the fossil fuel
industry or risk losing credibility.

Members of Climate Action Network (CAN) said:
May Boeve, Executive Director, 350.org:
Those most responsible for the climate crisis in the first place were
gathered at the World Economic Forum. Because of the power
and the money represented at Davos this week, we’ve seen
increasingly devastating climate impacts every year. These same
wealthy people have stood as a wall separating governments and
any real climate action. The climate movement is breaching that
wall. It is because of the power of millions of people who took to
the streets that these few billionaires are now feeling the urgency
of tackling climate breakdown. As we enter the new decade, we
need the world to know that the fossil fuel era is over. The
financiers and industry leaders would be wise to see the writing
on the wall and get out of this toxic industry in their own selfinterest, if not in the interest of the planet as a whole.

Gavan McFadzean, Climate Change and Clean Energy Manager,
Australian Conservation Foundation:
Australia is the third largest exporter of fossil fuel emissions,
behind only Russia and Saudi Arabia. The emissions from these
fuels are turbo-charging climate change, which has contributed to
our unprecedented bushfire season. If we don’t urgently stop
digging up and burning coal, oil and gas, future bushfire seasons
will be even worse than this year’s devastating Australian summer.

Sven Harmeling, Global Policy Lead on Climate Change and Resilience,
CARE International:
The climate crisis is a harsh daily reality for hundreds of millions of
people, particularly women and girls, a fact which the leaders
gathered in Davos must put at the center of their actions. The
increasing risk of failure to prevent a complete climate breakdown
is a direct threat to us all, but particularly the poorest and most
vulnerable. 2020 must become the year where true and
meaningful action on emission cuts and climate adaptation
substitute lukewarm rhetoric and empty promises.

Dr Kat Kramer, Global Lead - Climate Change, Christian Aid:
WEF participants represent those businesses and interests
that have brought the world to its knees. Both the climate and
biosphere are in a state of crisis and we have failed to tackle
poverty. These powerful participants have the choice to break the
world through continuing with business-as-usual malevolent
practices. Alternatively, they can help to make a new future, one
that respects planetary limits and the rights of all to thrive. This
visionary future will require a rapid phase out of all fossil fuels –
gas included – electrification of the global economy through clean
renewable technologies and access to energy for all. It will require
the rich to consume less. It will require the conservation of

12 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

remaining wild places, and restoration of ecosystems that have
been destroyed or degraded in rapacious search of profits. The
fate of the planet and its people is in the hands of WEF
participants. Will they choose to destroy or to create hope?

Jennifer Morgan, Executive Director, Greenpeace International:
The banks, insurers and pension funds here at Davos are culpable
for the climate emergency. These money men say they support
the Paris Agreement, but since its signing they have been actively
undermining the accord by propping up the fossil fuel industry to
the tune of US$1.4 trillion dollars. The finance sector is leading us
into another financial crash in the midst of this climate
emergency. The regulators must do their jobs before it is too late
and financial actors have to start acting now on the scientific and
economic warnings.

Harjeet Singh, Global Lead on Climate Change, ActionAid:
Global elites in Davos are trying to disguise their lack of real
climate action to reduce emissions and shift away from fossil
fuels. They are trumpeting weak and false solutions such as tree
planting initiatives and technologies that don’t yet exist.
Meanwhile, across our dangerously warming planet, people are
already experiencing the agonising effects of the climate
emergency. Bushfires continue to rage in Australia, while 45
million people in Southern Africa are facing severe food insecurity
brought on by the worst drought the region has seen in 35 years.
It’s time for the rich countries and polluting industries that have
caused climate change to meet their obligations to those least
responsible, but who are suffering the most. We need
transformational system change and finance to tackle the crisis,
not business as usual and greenwashing.

Sriram Madhusoodanan, Deputy Campaigns Director, Corporate
Accountability:
Impacts of the climate crisis are endured daily by people on the
global frontlines -- young people, communities of color, people in
the Global South, women, and indigenous people. The global
movement to demand climate justice is growing and inescapable
— and the latest report from the World Economic Forum in Davos
further forces the recognition of the grave societal impacts of the
climate crisis.
But, the cheap words and greenwashing ploys that some of the
world’s dirtiest corporations have issued are unacceptable. It is
high time that the those most responsible for the global climate
crisis be held accountable for the devastations they are knowingly
driving, and high time for finance that addresses climate impacts
and paves the way for real solutions. People around the world are
demanding it. And we are resolved to make it a reality.

Ronan Palmer, Director, Clean Economy, E3G:
It’s hard to believe how tone deaf and out-of-tune Davos has
been this year. It should have been a gathering of leaders to
actually lead change and development, cohesion and
sustainability. It turns out to be lots of words, that are just not up
the scale of the real horror that has unfolded in Australia, or the
creeping destruction of habitats and of livelihoods caused by
Climate Change. In a year where there was at last a real political
space opened up by crowds of people, of voters, of consumers on

Climate justice 13

the streets looking for change, we just got more words. In the
year we really need to act to save our economies and standards of
living, we got no action. Davos should be better than this. The
fact that it isn’t is a serious indictment of world business leaders.

Sue Willsher, Senior Policy Advisor for Climate Change at Tearfund,
said:
The fact that climate change has been highlighted as a key risk
facing the world today at Davos is hugely encouraging. But the
sheer lack of inaction, disguised in 'green policies' by the
businesses, leaders and governments represented there, is
astonishing.
If we are to have any chance of limiting warming to 1.5 degrees
(in line with the Paris Agreement) we need sharp and urgent cuts
in emissions from governments and businesses in 2020. This
includes an end to investments in fossil fuels and a switch to
renewable energy.
Young people hitting the streets in their hundreds of thousands
have shown us they want action on climate change and are
willing to make changes in their own lifestyles, but as individuals
we can only do so much. How will history judge all of us on what
we have done to combat climate change?

Friends of the Earth International
COP 25: Resurgence of carbon markets threatens people, politics
and planet
2 December 2019, Madrid, Spain

As the international climate talks open today in Madrid, Spain, the
world faces the re-emergence of a threat that could derail urgent action
on the climate crisis: Carbon Markets are back on the table as a
proposed ‘solution’ to reduce emissions.
Dipti Bhatnagar, Climate Justice and Energy Programme Coordinator for
Friends of the Earth International, from Mozambique, said:
Big polluters must be rubbing their hands in glee that carbon
market mechanisms, which further dilute the already weak and
inadequate Paris emissions targets, are back on the agenda. We
will fight them tooth and nail. The climate crisis is already
devastating lives. Emissions are still rising. Now is not the time to
offer an escape route to polluting Northern country governments
and big oil.

Tackling the climate crisis requires a total, radical and immediate shift
away from fossil fuels and a huge flow of finance from the global North
to the global South. This is needed to repay the ecological debt, for a
just transition and for loss and damage. We need an economic and
political system which serves the needs of people, not profit - nothing
less than radical system change.
Bhatnagar continued:
Carbon markets fail to deliver emissions reductions or adequate
climate action and impact horrifically on Indigenous Peoples and

14 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

local communities. They only serve to strengthen corporate power
and impunity, deflect responsibility from rich historical polluters
and prevent urgent and equitable action on climate change.

With an abrupt change of location a month ago, COP25 becomes the
third of four consecutive UN climate conferences to be held in Europe.
As a result, Southern participation continues to be undermined.
Northern governments and corporations will be hoping for less scrutiny
from communities in the South so they can try and push through
dangerous false solutions. Friends of the Earth International and our
allies in the climate justice movement will be watching.
Meanwhile, the world’s attention will likely focus on European concerns
and not on the repression experienced in Chile and across Latin
America. While talks are underway in Madrid, civil society movements
are meeting in Chile to march against neoliberal policies and climate
injustice - their concerns must not be forgotten.
Karin Nansen, Chair of Friends of the Earth International, from Uruguay,
commented:
We stand in solidarity with the people of Chile in their struggle
against neoliberalism, inequality and violent repression. This COP
must not allow President Piñera’s government to build a positive
reputation abroad while oppressing his people at home. Chile
should not be the COP Presidency.

COP25 talks come hard on the heels of massive global mobilisations on
29 November. Greater numbers are expected on 6 December in
Madrid as well as Chile.
Blanca Ruibal from Friends of the Earth Spain said:
Peoples are rising up across the world, from Spain to Chile and
beyond. We say to governments and political decision makers:
ignore this wave of people power at your peril. The future of our
planet is at stake. We will continue fighting for it and stand with
the peoples who are most affected.

UN Sustainable Development Goals
New report offers details on how to maximize efforts to achieve
both climate action and the Sustainable Development Goals
12 November 2019
With the global challenge of climate action threatening progress made
on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), a new report from the
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA)
and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
offers ways to better serve both the world’s efforts to achieve the goals
of the Paris Climate Change Agreement and the SDGs to ensure better
lives for all people.
The new analysis, entitled “Maximizing Co-benefits by Linking
Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and Climate
Action,” is an extended summary report of the first Climate and SDGs
Synergy Conference—formally the “Global Conference on

Climate justice 15

Strengthening Synergies between the Paris Agreement and the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”—held from 1-3 April at UN City
in Copenhagen. The new summary report expands on the key
immediate action areas identified by Conference participants and aims
to promote coordinated implementation of the objectives of the 2030
Agenda and the SDGs, across all levels and sectors.
According to the report, the cooperative implementation needs a multilevel, bottom-up integration of climate action and the SDGs, aligned
with human rights. This would tackle the climate emergency and ensure
that the world’s most vulnerable groups—women, persons with
disabilities, older persons, youth, refugees and migrants are not left
behind.
Progress towards low-carbon, climate-resilient societies and economies
is already happening, as seen in the Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs) and National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) of the Paris
Agreement and the Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) of the SDGs put
forth by countries. Also promising is that there is growing awareness of
climate change among governments and other stakeholders, and
adaption and mitigation mechanisms are more deeply embedded in
governmental structures. On the other hand, there are still gaps in many
developing countries and progress remains slow.
The development of low-emission economies requires deep structural
changes to global energy, transport, water and food production systems
in order to eradicate extreme poverty and achieve sustainable economic
growth. Achieving these will be even more difficult with the effects of
climate change that we are already seeing, including more
severe temperature variations, sea level rise, floods and droughts. These
hazards make the world’s water, agriculture, health and forestry sectors
more vulnerable.
Furthermore, implementing specific SDGs would be directly beneficial in
achieving the goals of the Paris Agreement. Particularly, speeding up the
energy transition (SDG 7) and more sustainably managing forests and
other terrestrial ecosystems (SDG 15) would directly and positively affect
greenhouse gas emissions. Similarly, sustainable industrialization (SDG
9), sustainable food production systems and resilient agricultural
practices (SDG 2) and responsible consumption and production (SDG
12) contribute to low emission pathways and sustainable development.
In addition, limiting global temperature increase to well below 1.5
degrees Celsius would be beneficial to the SDGs related to resilience
and disaster risk reduction, such as poverty (SDG 1), infrastructure (SDG
9) and urban settlement (SDG 11).
Climate change is already causing extreme weather conditions, leading
to human and socioeconomic costs and reversing development gains.
Therefore, the actions indicated in NDCs and NAPs, as well as the
targets of SDG 13 on climate action, should be integrated into policies,
programmes and budgets across all sectors.

16 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

Read the full report online
here: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/climate-sdgs-synergies2019
House of Commons International Development Committee
16 July 2019
The International Development Committee (IDC) identifies
serious failings in the preparation and presentation of UK’s first
Voluntary National Review of progress towards the UN’s
Sustainable Development Goals.

Government’s Voluntary National Review casts doubt on its
commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals
•

Read the Report Summary [HTML]

•

Read the Report's Recommendations and Conclusions [HTML]

•

Read the Report [HTML]

•

Government response: UK's progress on the Sustainable
Development Goals: The Voluntary National Review

Report findings
•

The UK has taken a long time to get around to producing a VNR
(some countries have produced two since 2015) and so
expectations were naturally that much higher, and the
disappointment that much greater.

•

The Government had 19 months between committing to a VNR
and producing it. Despite this, the timeline was squeezed and
most of the work – and virtually all of the engagement activity –
was left to the last few months, preventing stakeholders from
meaningfully engaging in, or influencing, the final report.

•

The engagement activity recommended by the UN –
consultation with stakeholders like human rights institutions;
trades unions; business and industry; NGOs; parliamentarians
and UK academia – was not only late but also ‘ad hoc’ and
superficial.

•

The VNR itself was selective and partial, relying on cherry-picked
data, context-free snapshots and positive vignettes, to present a
‘good story’. It skirted discussion of some serious issues, for
instance: food security, poverty trends and EU withdrawal. The
Secretary of State for International Development told the
Committee there was “nervousness” around the Government
“marking [its] own homework”.

•

The implications of these failings of process and substance in the
VNR is that the UK is not taking the SDG initiative seriously – as
integral to, and coherent with, the Government’s overall
agenda. This is also evident in making DFID the lead
coordinating department, as opposed the Cabinet Office, whose
role is “supporting collective government, helping to ensure the

Climate justice 17

effective development, coordination and implementation of
policy”. The IDC will return to this matter later in the year.
In consequence, today’s IDC report calls for:
•

Steps to implement the UK’s commitment to the SDG agenda
(such as: a convincing statement at today’s UN High Level
Political Forum; giving overall responsibility for SDGs to the
Cabinet Office; building the Goals into cross-government
planning, spending review and reporting processes), and

•

A commitment at the HLPF to: producing a further Review in
three years’ time, with a more collaborative, consultative and
comprehensive VNR process; and delivery of a more rigorous,
data-driven, contextualised evaluation of the UK’s performance
against the SDG targets next time.

Chair's comments
Stephen Twigg MP, Chair of the Committee, said:
Today, the UK will present its first Voluntary National Review to
the UN. This should have provided a clear indication of how far
the UK has progressed towards meeting the Sustainable
Development Goals, a global agenda which includes the most
crucial challenges facing the world today, across the full spectrum
of social, economic, political and environmental issues. However,
we have found both the preparation and the presentation of the
VNR to be gravely flawed.
We fear that the priority and resources committed to the VNR
process – and the whole SDGs agenda – reflect a lack of
engagement and understanding at the heart of, and throughout,
the UK Government.
We do welcome the progress the UK is shown to have made, and
signs of some efforts made to incorporate sustainable
development across government departments. But this progress
has been uneven, and knowledge of the Sustainable Development
Goals across Government remains limited. Our sincere hope is
that the Government has learned important lessons from this first
VNR process and that, at today’s presentation at the HLPF, will
kickstart a fresh commitment to the SDGs.

The Climate Emergency: “....this year the answers are different.”
Speech by Sir James Bevan, Chief Executive of the Environment Agency.
Royal Holloway University, London, 24 October 2019

18 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

4. Parliamentary material
Debates
Commons petition debate: Amazon Deforestation
HC Deb 07 October 2019 | Vol 664 c425WHhttp://bit.ly/2LXNG2k
Commons debate: Climate Change, the Environment and Global
Development
HC Deb 10 July 2019 | Vol 663 c363http://bit.ly/32l5xGQ
Commons debate: Economic Growth and Environmental Limits
HC Deb 10 July 2019 | Vol 663 c177WHhttp://bit.ly/2Sf8x2Y
Commons debate: Climate Change
HC Deb 24 June 2019 | Vol 662 c506http://bit.ly/2X61yix
on the Climate Change Act 2008 (2050 Target Amendment) Order

2019
Commons debate: Sustainable Development Goals
HC Deb 11 June 2019 | Vol 661 c592http://bit.ly/2WF4dzc
Commons debate: Environment and Climate Change
HC Deb 01 May 2019 | Vol 659 c225http://bit.ly/2GOzuoJ
Commons debate: UN Climate Change Conference: Government
Response
HC Deb 16 January 2019 | Vol 652 c439WHhttp://bit.ly/2Dejgoq

Climate justice 19

PQs
Climate Justice
Asked by: Angela Crawley
What recent meetings he had with his international counterparts on
climate justice at the UN General Assembly.
Asked by: Deidre Brock (Edinburgh North and Leith) (SNP)
What recent meetings he had with his international counterparts on
climate justice at the UN General Assembly.
Answered by: The Minister of State, Department for
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Zac Goldsmith)
Climate change and biodiversity were top priorities for the Government
at the recent UN General Assembly. The UK played a leading role, with
the Prime Minister announcing a doubling of our international climate
finance to £11.6 billion and a major focus on backing nature-based
solutions to climate change.
Angela Crawley
The International Development Committee has specifically
recommended that the UK Government should adopt the concept of
climate justice to guide their climate spending, but this Government
seem scared to even utter the words: not a single International
Development Minister has ever said the words “climate justice” in this
Chamber. Why are this Government so intent on ignoring this
recommendation?
Zac Goldsmith
Given what we know about the science in relation to climate change
and what we know about what is happening to biodiversity, habitat and
species loss, it is absolutely right that this Government’s focus should be
on tackling and preventing climate change, both through technology
and by doing everything we can to protect and restore the natural
world. If we do not do that, no amount of money from this or any other
aid Department will properly compensate poorer countries for the
devastation that will follow.
Deidre Brock
I am afraid that the Minister failed entirely to answer my hon. Friend’s
question. Will he tell the House when he will follow Scotland’s lead and
the recommendation of the International Development Committee and
explicitly adopt the concept of climate justice to help to guide climate
mitigation spending?
Zac Goldsmith
I thank the hon. Lady for her question, but I do not agree that I did not
answer the previous one. We provide £5.8 billion for climate finance at

20 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

the moment, and that will double to at least £11.6 billion. The whole
basis of that programme is, in a sense, climate justice. It is about helping
developing countries to prepare for climate change, to adapt to the
inevitable changes and to fight the causes of climate change to
minimise the impact.
Mrs Pauline Latham (Mid Derbyshire) (Con)
By 2030, the destruction of the world’s important habitats and the
threat of climate change could force more than 100 million people into
poverty. Does my hon. Friend agree that urgent action is needed to
tackle deforestation throughout the world?
I commend my hon. Friend for all her work on this issue. She is
absolutely right, and that is why, when the Prime Minister spoke at the
UN, he emphasised the importance of investing in nature as a means of
tackling climate change. She mentions forests, and they are an obvious
example. About 1 billion people depend on forests for their survival, and
protecting and restoring forests alleviates poverty, tackles climate
change and helps to reverse the biodiversity loss that we have seen over
recent years.
James Gray (North Wiltshire) (Con)
First, may I welcome my hon. Friend to his well-deserved place at the
Dispatch Box? The environmental world rejoices that he is there, and I
know he will do an outstandingly good job. Does he agree that it is a
perfectly legitimate use of aid funds to spend money on climate change
reduction and climate change battling as well as on the mitigation of
the worst effects of climate change? That helps in a global sense, and it
also helps to mitigate the worst effects for the poorest people in the
world.
Zac Goldsmith
I thank my hon. Friend for his kind words. He is exactly right to say that
we will have no hope at all of tackling poverty globally if we do not take
a bigger interest in preventing climate change and the annihilation of
the natural world that we have seen in recent decades. The people on
the frontline in relation to nature destruction are the world’s poorest
people. They are the people who depend most directly on the natural
world, so he is absolutely right.
Kerry McCarthy (Bristol East) (Lab)
I welcome the Minister to his post. I am sure he will agree that the food
and farming system has a major impact on climate change in developing
countries, from deforestation to water use and mountains of food
waste, but that is not really talked about in DFID terms except for some
small livestock programmes. Can he assure me that it will be at the top
of his agenda as a Minister in this Department? [912510]
Zac Goldsmith
As we heard from the Secretary of State in his first answer, we have
committed serious sums of money to enabling smallholders around the
world to adapt to climate change. We have also launched an initiative at

Climate justice 21

the UN called the Just Rural Transition, which is about shifting the way
subsidies are spent around the world on land use, away from
unsustainable use towards sustainable use, just as we are doing in this
country. The OECD tells us that the 50 top food-producing nations
spend £700 billion a year subsidising land use, on the whole very badly.
If we can shift even a fraction of that, it will have a much bigger impact
than all the world’s aid departments put together.
HC Deb 02 October 2019 | Vol 664 cc1209-1210
Climate Change
Asked by: Neil Gray (Airdrie and Shotts) (SNP)
What support his Department provides to help developing countries
manage the effects of climate change. [911986]
Asked by: Alex Chalk (Cheltenham) (Con)
What steps his Department is taking to prioritise (a) tackling the effects
of climate change and (b) protecting the environment in developing
countries. [911991]
Asked by: Rachel Maclean (Redditch) (Con)
What steps his Department is taking to prioritise (a) tackling the effects
of climate change and (b) protecting the environment in developing
countries. [911996]
Answered by: The Secretary of State for International
Development (Rory Stewart)
The distinction traditionally made between development, environment
and climate is a false distinction. Unless we tackle climate change, there
will be 100 million more people living in poverty in the next 15 years. I
returned this morning from New York, where I have been discussing
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations our commitment to
greening our development spending to ensure that everything that we
spend is Paris-compliant, to double the amount the Department for
International Development will spend on environment and climate, and
to double the effort we are putting into this subject.
Neil Gray
I thank the International Development Secretary for his answer and
appreciate his focus on the importance of tackling climate change, but
does he accept that it needs to be in addition to traditional
development support? To that end, will he examine the Scottish
Government’s climate justice fund, which seeks to support those who
have done the least to cause climate change but who are to be hit first
and hardest by its effects?
Rory Stewart
It is clearly true that many of the people who are suffering most are
from some of the poorest countries in the world that emit very little
carbon, which is why a great deal of our emphasis is on the question of

22 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

resilience. I have just returned from Kenya, for example, where we are
working with pastoralists whose grassland is being eliminated and with
people in Lamu who are losing mangrove swamps. Such countries are
not emitting carbon but are suffering from its effects.
Alex Chalk
On that precise issue, what is being done to improve resilience in water
security, to ensure that that does not become a source of conflict, or
indeed disease, in future?
Rory Stewart
The question of water security is absolutely central. It poses the danger
of conflict, for example in the Indus valley and along the headwaters of
the rivers that flow into Egypt on the Nile. It is also an area where
technology can help, however. We have become much better at
preventing water waste. In many developing countries, 50% of the
water is wasted; technology is part of the answer to this problem.
Rachel Maclean
My right hon. Friend has made it clear that some of the poorest
countries in the world will be the most affected by climate change. I
hope to visit Bangladesh in September as part of a delegation; what will
his Department be doing to help countries such as Bangladesh mitigate
the effects of severe weather, including the monsoon season?
Rory Stewart
The Department for International Development has partnered the
Government of Bangladesh for many years, particularly because of the
very severe impacts of flooding. We should pay tribute to the
improvements in Bangladesh. In floods in the 1970s, more than
100,000 people could be killed in a single event; a similar event today
would kill only a few hundreds. That is a huge tribute to Bangladesh’s
improvement in resilience and also in emergency management.
Dr Rosena Allin-Khan (Tooting) (Lab)
I have worked with flood victims in refugee camps around the world;
the despair is palpable and tragic, and it is simply inhumane that these
same people will be hit the hardest by further extreme weather
conditions. This House declared a climate change emergency; will the
Government today outline how they will financially support the world’s
most vulnerable and plan for dealing with future tragedies?
Rory Stewart
We will be doubling the overseas development fund, which will be
spent particularly on climate resilience, and Britain will be co-hosting
with Egypt the UN summit on climate resilience in September. That was
the focus of my discussions with the UN Secretary-General yesterday,
and indeed at the Abu Dhabi summit two weeks ago.
Mr Barry Sheerman (Huddersfield) (Lab/Co-op)
Does the Secretary of State agree that if we are truly to tackle climate
change we need to ensure that the money that we give—the vital

Climate justice 23

money that we give—goes to the right place where it matters? Will he
look at innovations such as digital currencies, especially blockchain,
which enables the money to be tracked to make sure that it does not go
into a dictator’s slush fund or to train Spice Girls in Nigeria?
Rory Stewart
Blockchain technology has very interesting potential. I recently saw in
World Food Programme distribution in camps in Jordan how blockchain
is dropping the price by tens of millions of dollars a year. However,
there are still some risks attached to such technology.
Patrick Grady (Glasgow North) (SNP)
The right hon. Gentleman is perhaps the most diligent and committed
Secretary of State for International Development that I and my hon.
Friend the Member for Dundee West (Chris Law), who is still in New
York with the Select Committee, have had the opportunity to question
at the Dispatch Box. What steps is the right hon. Gentleman taking to
solidify and embed the new priority of climate change in his
Department? Will he commission a Green Paper or a White Paper to
keep the Department moving in that direction, irrespective of what
happens under a new Prime Minister in the coming weeks?
Rory Stewart
There are three things that we hope will embed the priority. First, this is
a whole of Government approach. The Prime Minister announced at
Osaka that we would be the first major international development
agency to be fully Paris-compliant. Secondly, we have now announced
from this Dispatch Box and inserted into our planning that we will
double our spend on climate and the environment. The third thing is to
ensure that we have the experts on the ground. In Kenya, for example,
the focus is on environmental experts, and in Ethiopia it is on forestry
experts. It will be funding, Government strategy and staffing that will
make the difference.
Sir Oliver Heald (North East Hertfordshire) (Con)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that agricultural practice and land use
are key to mitigating the effects of climate change? Will he say
something about the training programmes that DFID pays for and that
are doing such good work in helping people to understand the way
forward?
Rory Stewart
DFID is doing an increasing amount of work on that issue. For example,
its agricultural extension work is helping farmers to work out how to
produce crops without depleting the soil or using excessive water.
Perhaps the biggest challenge in agriculture is the relationship between
pastoralists, particularly people herding cattle and oxen, and sedentary
communities right the way across Africa, where climate change and
agricultural practices are leading to conflict from Nigeria to South
Sudan.
Dan Carden (Liverpool, Walton) (Lab)

24 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

The UK is the largest contributor to the World Bank’s climate investment
funds, yet civil society groups say that, compared with UN funds, those
funds are undemocratic, opaque and dominated by donor countries.
The Secretary of State has committed to doubling DFID’s climate
spending, but does he think that the World Bank’s climate investment
funds are fit for purpose?
Rory Stewart
The shadow Secretary of State is absolutely right to say that there have
been significant issues around some of the climate funds. We feel that a
lot of progress is being made, and the most important thing is to find
real investable projects on the ground. A lot of that relates to issues of
governance.
Dan Carden
I am grateful to the Secretary of State for that answer, but the truth is
that the World Bank knows that it was supposed to phase out its
climate investment funds once the United Nations green climate fund
was up and running. Labour is clear: we believe in climate justice and
we are committed to withdrawing the UK’s support for the World
Bank’s climate investment funds and to redirecting climate finance to
the UN green climate fund, in which developing countries get a real say.
Will the Government now do the same?
Rory Stewart
No, we will not. The reason is that there are issues of capacity in both
the World Bank and the UN. The key point here is not the ideological
choice of the channel through which we pass the money but the
capacity to manage these projects responsibly.
HC Deb 17 July 2019 | Vol 663 c815
Global Warming
Asked by: Christian Matheson (City of Chester) (Lab)
If she will make reducing global warming a strategic priority of her
Department.
Asked by: Dr Roberta Blackman-Woods (City of Durham) (Lab)
If she will make reducing global warming a strategic priority of her
Department.
Asked by: Jeff Smith (Manchester, Withington) (Lab)
If she will make reducing global warming a strategic priority of her
Department.
Answered by: The Minister of State, Department for
International Development (Harriett Baldwin)
Climate change is a major threat to achieving the sustainable
development goals, and tackling it is a strategic priority for the
Government and for my Department. The Government are delivering

Climate justice 25

£5.8 billion in international climate finance to help developing countries
to reduce emissions and to manage the impact of climate change.
Christian Matheson
Last Friday, thousands of children took to the streets, including in my
own constituency, because they know that we have only 12 years left to
make a difference on climate change. So why is the Department still
spending money through its prosperity fund on expanding the oil and
gas sectors in several countries where that fund is active?
Harriett Baldwin
I welcome the opportunity that the interest young people are showing
in climate change gives us to highlight the important work that we are
doing. I can assure the hon. Gentleman that we do not provide any
bilateral assistance for coal-fired power generation, and that CDC, our
private sector investment arm, has made no new net investments in
coal-fired power since 2012.
Dr Blackman-Woods
Will the Minister update the House on what DFID is doing to follow
through on the agreement made at the Commonwealth Heads of
Government meeting in 2018 to support urgent action to address
climate change and to increase resilience to prevent 100 million more
people from being pushed into poverty by 2030?
Harriett Baldwin
The hon. Lady is absolutely right to highlight the importance of
commitments that were made last year at the Commonwealth Heads of
Government meeting. There is an extensive programme of work to
follow through on those commitments, not least the £5.8 billion of
international climate finance that we have announced so far, which has
already helped 47 million people to increase their resilience to climate
change. We will be leading that strand at the United Nations summit in
September.
Jeff Smith
The Minister said that there is no net investment from DFID and the
CDC. I would be interested to know what she means by that, because
we surely need a greater priority on disinvestment in oil and gas
extraction. Is she not worried, as I am, about the possibility of stranded
assets as a result of investments we have made in the global south?
Harriett Baldwin
We have an important role to play in working with our international
bilateral partners to encourage the use of clean growth and clean
energy. For example, the week before last, we held an event here in
support of sustainable development goal 7 to which we invited African
Energy Ministers from developing countries to meet some of the people
we have in the UK with expertise on renewable energy.
Michael Fabricant (Lichfield) (Con)

26 Number CDP 2020/0020, 3 February 2020

Solar energy is a relatively clean way to generate electricity. What steps
are we taking in Africa to help not only people who are off-grid but
those who are on-grid, too?
Harriett Baldwin
My hon. Friend is absolutely right that solar energy, particularly in sunny
places, is a very good idea. Indeed, there is some very windy coastline
where offshore wind energy would also be very helpful. In addition to
the event that we held for African Energy Ministers the week before
last, we have come up with some remarkable inventions using some of
our overseas development assistance—for example, a solar-powered
fridge.
Antoinette Sandbach (Eddisbury) (Con)
Will the Minister outline the steps the Department is taking to improve
biodiversity and habitat enhancement, particularly through the recent
investment in the Darwin initiative?
Harriett Baldwin
My hon. Friend will be glad to know that I work closely with my
counterparts at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs
and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy to join
up the work we are doing to tackle biodiversity, specifically the
contribution we have made to the global environment fund.
Robert Courts (Witney) (Con)
Mangrove forests are one of the most effective habitats at storing
carbon dioxide that might otherwise be released. What are the
Government doing to help reduce mangrove forest loss?
Harriett Baldwin
We have rebranded them blue forests. We think they are incredibly
important, and not only as a way to store carbon; recently it was proven
that they also improve resilience to cyclones. They are an important part
of the work and have been championed vigorously by the UnderSecretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, my hon.
Friend the Member for Suffolk Coastal (Dr Coffey).
Chris Law (Dundee West) (SNP)
Last Friday, on the same day that 1.4 million children went on climate
strike across the world, more than 1,000 people were killed in
Mozambique and Zimbabwe during Cyclone Idai. Does the Minister
agree that young people and those living in the developing world are
the least responsible yet will bear the brunt of the climate crisis? If so,
does she agree that the UK Government must make climate justice a
key part of their climate change strategy?
Harriett Baldwin
That is exactly why the UK is proud to be stepping up our work on
international climate finance. We have committed £5.8 billion to work
with some of the poorer countries in the world, including those affected
by this cyclone in Mozambique. There will be an urgent question later,

Climate justice 27

when I will be able to elaborate on the work that the UK has done to
help with the situation there.
Preet Kaur Gill (Birmingham, Edgbaston) (Lab/Co-op)
Our thoughts are with all those affected by the devastation of Cyclone
Idai across Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Malawi, and I would like to
share with the House the thoughts of—[Interruption.]
Mr Speaker
Order. There are a lot of noisy private conversations taking place. It is
rather discourteous to the hon. Lady, who is highlighting very grave
matters.
Preet Kaur Gill
Our thoughts are with all those affected by the devastation of Cyclone
Idai across Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Malawi, and I would like to
share with the House the thoughts of Anabela Lemos, a woman at the
forefront of the climate justice movement in Mozambique. She says:
“The people of Mozambique need emergency response and support
right now to survive this crisis. But this is also a harsh reminder that the
climate crisis is upon us and developed countries need to urgently
reduce their emissions and stop funding fossil fuels.”
I welcome the relief package for the region issued by DFID, but it is a
tragic irony of climate change that those least responsible are the ones
who pay the highest price. A key component of the—
Mr Speaker
Order. This simply is not on. I do not wish to be unkind to the hon.
Lady, but I need one sentence with a question mark at the end of it. My
apologies for interrupting, but this is far too long.
Preet Kaur Gill
Will the Minister confirm whether the Government have plans to offer
any additional climate finance to support vulnerable communities and
countries to cope with the consequences of climate change?
Harriett Baldwin
I can confirm that we are already committed to spending £5.8 billion
over this spending period, which will involve us being able to increase
our finance over the next spending review period. There will be an
urgent question later, when we can talk about the specific situation in
Mozambique. The report from the Independent Commission for Aid
Impact recently said that UK international climate finance is showing a
very convincing approach, with some good emerging results in terms of
influencing others. We aim to continue with that work.
HC Deb 20 March 2019 | Vol 656 cc1030-1

About the Library
The House of Commons Library research service provides MPs and their staff
with the impartial briefing and evidence base they need to do their work in
scrutinising Government, proposing legislation, and supporting constituents.
As well as providing MPs with a confidential service we publish open briefing
papers, which are available on the Parliament website.
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available research briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should
be aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated or otherwise
amended to reflect subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email papers@parliament.uk.
Authors are available to discuss the content of this briefing only with Members
and their staff.
If you have any general questions about the work of the House of Commons
you can email hcinfo@parliament.uk.

Disclaimer
This information is provided to Members of Parliament in support of their
parliamentary duties. It is a general briefing only and should not be relied on as
a substitute for specific advice. The House of Commons or the author(s) shall
not be liable for any errors or omissions, or for any loss or damage of any kind
arising from its use, and may remove, vary or amend any information at any
time without prior notice.

DEBATE PACK
Number CDP 2020/0020
3 February 2020

The House of Commons accepts no responsibility for any references or links to,
or the content of, information maintained by third parties. This information is
provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.

