BRIEFING PAPER
Number CBP 8394, 19 June 2020

Brexit: Energy and
Climate Change

By Suzanna Hinson and
Sara Priestley

Contents:
1. Introduction
2. Civil Nuclear - Euratom
3. Energy
4. Implications for the island of
Ireland
5. Climate Change
6. Annex: Previous material on
preparations for a possible
“no deal” scenario (2017January 2020)

www.parliament.uk/commons-library | intranet.parliament.uk/commons-library | papers@parliament.uk | @commonslibrary

2

Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Contents
Summary

3

1.

Introduction

5

2.
2.1

Civil Nuclear - Euratom
Background on Civil Nuclear
Nuclear Safeguards
Nuclear Cooperation Agreements for trade
Radioisotopes
Research
Negotiating positions for the Future Relationship
Commentary

7
7
7
7
8
9
10
11

3.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4

Energy
The Internal Energy Market (IEM)
Considerations for the Future Relationship
Other energy impacts
Negotiating positions for the Future Relationship
Commentary

13
13
18
20
21
24

4.
4.1

Implications for the island of Ireland
The Single Electricity Market (SEM)
Considerations for the Future Relationship
Negotiating positions for the Future Relationship
Commentary

27
27
28
28
31

Climate Change
Negotiating positions of the EU and the UK Government
2017-18
2019
2020
Further information
International framework
The Kyoto Protocol
The Paris Agreement
The future relationship
Commentary
Carbon pricing
The UK’s participation in the EU ETS
The future relationship
Commentary

33
34
34
35
35
37
37
37
38
39
40
42
42
44
47

Annex: Previous material on preparations for a possible “no deal”
scenario (2017-January 2020)
Civil Nuclear
Energy trading and the IEM
The island of Ireland
Other energy
Climate change

49
49
50
51
53
55

2.2

4.2
5.
5.1

5.2

5.3

6.
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5

Contributing Authors:

Paul Bolton and Noel Dempsey

Cover page image copyright: Attribution: Satellite view of Europe at night / image
cropped. Licensed under CC0 Creative Commons – no copyright required.

3

Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

Summary
The UK left the European Union (EU) on 31 January 2020. The UK is currently in the
transition period as set out in the Withdrawal Agreement, which entered into force with
the UK’s departure. Until the transition period ends (expected to be at the end of 2020),
the UK will continue to have the same relationship with regards to rules, including on
energy and climate change, as when the UK was a Member State of the EU.
This paper sets out the existing relationship between the UK and EU in relation to energy
and climate change and the position of both parties regarding these areas in the
negotiations for the future relationship.
Energy
Member States of the EU are ultimately responsible for the energy supply to their citizens,
and for deciding on the most appropriate energy mix. However, the UK and EU energy
sectors remain integrated through trade, legislation, and interconnection of energy supply,
as well as sharing joint research and development aims.
Civil nuclear - Euratom
The European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) provides the basis for the regulation
of civilian nuclear activity in its members. Euratom’s roles include implementing a system
of safeguards to monitor the use of civil nuclear materials, controlling the supply of
nuclear materials, and funding research.
The UK left Euratom as part of its departure from the EU, though the arrangements
between Euratom and the UK will continue through the transition period. Both the UK
Government and EU negotiating directives for the future relationship refer to an intention
for “cooperation” on civil nuclear.
The UK Government has already legislated to replicate Euratom’s nuclear safeguards
regime and negotiated agreements for nuclear trade with certain countries. More
information is available in the Library paper on Euratom.
Energy trading
The UK has five electricity interconnectors with continental Europe and the island of
Ireland and more are either under construction or planned. As part of the transition
period, the UK remains a member of the EU internal energy market (IEM) which allows
harmonised, tariff-free trading of gas and electricity across Europe through
interconnectors. This harmonised market makes trading more efficient and can reduce
costs to consumers.
The future of the UK relationship with the IEM is subject to the negotiations. Both parties
have published draft texts detailing provisions on cooperation on trade in electricity and
gas. While there are areas of overlap, there are also differences between the positions
including on the details of energy trading, membership of bodies, and governance.
Implications for the island of Ireland
The island of Ireland operates a Single Electricity Market (SEM) which allows free trade of
power across the island. A new Integrated Single Electricity Market designed closely
around the rules of the IEM, launched in 2018.
Provisions to allow the continued functioning of the SEM were set out in the Protocol on
Ireland/Northern Ireland in the Withdrawal Agreement. The UK’s future relationship with

4

Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

the IEM may have an impact on the operation of the SEM as currently the only
connections between the island of Ireland and mainland Europe are through
interconnectors via Great Britain. The Withdrawal Agreement did not cover trading
between the island of Ireland and GB; stakeholders have called for the future relationship
negotiations to consider arrangements to facilitate this trading.
Climate change
The UK Government is committed to domestic and international efforts to tackle climate
change, neither of which have been impacted by leaving the EU. However, the level of the
UK’s involvement, future cooperation and alignment with EU climate change efforts
remains subject to ongoing negotiation. As an example, on carbon pricing, the UK
Government and devolved Administrations have designed a new UK emissions trading
scheme for 2021 onwards, which may or may not be linked to the EU emissions trading
scheme. The inclusion of enforceable climate change obligations, including those at an
international level such as the Paris Agreement, within the UK-EU trade agreement also
remains subject to ongoing negotiations.

5

Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

1. Introduction
The UK left the European Union (EU) on 31 January 2020. The UK is
currently in the transition period as set out in the Withdrawal
Agreement which entered into force with the UK’s departure. Until the
transition period ends (currently expected to be at the end of 2020) the
UK will continue to have the same relationship with regards to rules,
including on energy and climate change, as when the UK was a
Member State of the EU.
The UK’s energy and climate change sectors are largely governed by
domestic policy, but aspects are also integrated with the EU, meaning
the future relationship could affect several energy and climate change
policies. This remains subject to the outcome of the ongoing
negotiations.
On energy, although Member States remain ultimately responsible for
security of energy supply to citizens, and for deciding their energy mix,
the UK and EU energy sectors remain integrated through trade,
legislation and interconnection of energy supply. Consequently, the
future relationship between the UK and EU has the potential to affect
the UK’s civil nuclear industry, including nuclear power and research,
and the trade of electricity and gas through interconnectors. Additional
areas that may be affected include the island of Ireland’s energy market,
energy efficiency regulations, and general energy infrastructure through
wider changes to trade and the movement of people.
On climate change, the UK has standalone domestic legislation in the
form of the Climate Change Act 2008 including a net zero by 2050
target. The UK is also part of an international effort to combat climate
change, which, until the end of the transition period, is intertwined to
some extent with the EU, including contributing to the EU’s
international commitments and direct participation in the EU emissions
trading scheme. The UK’s future alignment with EU climate change
mechanisms is subject to negotiations, but there will be some domestic
changes including a new UK emissions trading scheme which is due to
be put in place by 2021.
The Withdrawal Agreement contains technical information relating to
the civil nuclear industry. The Ireland/Northern Ireland protocol within
the Withdrawal Agreement will come into force at the end of the
transition period and provide for the continued operation of the Irish
Single Electricity Market including Northern Ireland’s continued
participation in the EU ETS. The Political Declaration includes references
to future cooperation on a number of areas, including energy trading,
nuclear cooperation, and tackling climate change in international fora
and under international agreements.
In relation to the future relationship negotiations, the UK Government
has not included energy or climate change in its proposed
comprehensive free trade agreement. Instead it has proposed a separate

6

Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

draft energy agreement 1 which includes provisions on trading in gas
and electricity, as well as proposals on climate change co-operation,
climate change laws and policies and carbon pricing. The UK has also
published a separate draft civil nuclear agreement. 2
In contrast, the EU has included energy, climate change, and civil
nuclear within its draft treaty. 3 The draft treaty includes measures to
facilitate nuclear cooperation, promote energy efficiency and renewable
energy, maintain competitive markets and use gas and electricity
interconnectors “efficiently”. The EU includes the fight against climate
change as an “essential element” of the partnership as well as within its
proposed level playing field provisions.
This paper focuses on the EU and UK Government positions. The
Northern Ireland Executive, 4 Scottish Government 5 and Welsh
Government 6 have all made statements setting out their position on the
future relationship negotiations. The research services in Northern
Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, have also published briefings on the
negotiations and the specific implications for each of the devolved
nations.

1
2

3

4

5

6

UK Negotiating Team, Draft working text for an agreement on energy, 19 May 2020
UK negotiating team, Draft working text for an agreement […] on Cooperation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, 19 May 2020
European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, 18 March 2020
The Executive Office, Statement from the First Minister and deputy First Minister on
the publication of the UK negotiating mandate, 27 February 2020
Scottish Government, EU-UK future relationship negotiations: statement by the
Cabinet Secretary for Constitution, Europe and External Affairs, 3 June 2020
Welsh Government, Written Statement: Welsh Government’s analysis of the UK
Government’s negotiating mandate for the Future Relationship with the EU, 28
February 2020

7

Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

2. Civil Nuclear - Euratom
The European Atomic Energy Community, better known as Euratom,
was established in the 1950s as part of the creation of the European
Community. The UK became a member of Euratom on 1 January 1973 7
and left on 31 January 2020 as it entered the transition period in line
with the Withdrawal Agreement.
Euratom provides the basis for the regulation of civil nuclear activity
(meaning non-military uses of nuclear such as power production and
medicine). Euratom’s role includes implementing a system of safeguards
to monitor the use of civil nuclear materials, controlling the supply of
fissile materials within EU member states, and funding leading
international research such as the Culham Centre of Fusion Energy in
Oxfordshire.
For more information, see the Library’s briefing paper on Euratom.

2.1 Background on Civil Nuclear
The UK’s future relationship with Euratom could have implications for
the UK’s current nuclear operations, including fuel supply, waste
management, cooperation with other nuclear states, and research. The
UK Government has said it wants a “close” and “effective” future
relationship with Euratom. 8

Nuclear Safeguards
Nuclear Safeguards are measures to verify that countries comply with
their international obligations not to use civil nuclear materials for
nuclear weapons. 9
The Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018 provided for a new domestic
safeguard regime to replace the Euratom regime. Before the UK left
Euratom, funding was allocated to the UK’s existing body, the Office of
Nuclear Regulation, to implement the new regime. 10 As such, there was
not a disruptive impact on nuclear safeguards as part of the UK’s exit
from Euratom.
The Library Briefing on the Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018 provides
further detail.

Nuclear Cooperation Agreements for trade
Nuclear Cooperation Agreements (NCAs) facilitate trade, for example, in
nuclear materials including fuel. An NCA is not a legal requirement for
trade in many countries (where export licences can be used) but is a
requirement in Australia, Canada, Japan and the US. The UK already
had an agreement with Japan, and agreed new NCAs with the US in
7
8

9

10

Treaty of Accession of Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom, 1972

HM Government, The Future Relationship between the United Kingdom and the
European Union, 12 July 2018, Cm 9593, para 144
Office for Nuclear Regulation, What are nuclear safeguards? [accessed 16 June
2020]
Written Statement [Energy Policy], HCWS445, 2 February 2018 and Written Statement
[Energy Policy], HCWS617, 16 April 2018

8

Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

May 2018, with Australia in August 2018; 11 and with Canada in
November 2018. 12

Radioisotopes
The Euratom treaty not only manages the movement of nuclear material
for power production, but also for medical uses. Radioactive isotopes 13
are used in medicine for the diagnosis and treatment of various
diseases, including cancers, cardiovascular and brain disorders. 14 In the
UK, around 700,000 nuclear medicine procedures using radioisotopes
are carried out each year. 15
Medical isotopes are imported into the UK; mainly sourced from a few
research reactors. 16 Many of these reactors are in EU countries such as
the Netherlands, Poland, Belgium, France, Germany and the Czechia. 17
Although radioisotopes can be sourced from beyond the EU, the
materials often have short half-lives meaning they can decay rapidly and
cannot be stored. This creates the need for constant supply which has
failed in the past, creating global shortages. 18
Prior to the UK’s departure from Euratom, some health specialists 19 and
MPs 20 expressed concern that any changes to import arrangements as a
result of leaving Euratom could impact on the delivery of health
treatments.
In a letter to Prime Minister Johnson on 1 August 2019, three groups
who procure and use radioisotopes (the Royal College of Radiologists,
the British Nuclear Medicine Society, and the UK Radiopharmacy Group)
said they were “encouraged” by the work being undertaken by the
Government to secure supplies of radioisotopes after Brexit (at the time
various Brexit scenarios were possible). However, they continued that
they “remain[ed] apprehensive” about supplier readiness and the
impact of supply changes on patients. They asked the Prime Minister for
clarity on issues including supplies in relation to a no deal Brexit which
was a possibility at the time (see Section 6) but also on what action
would be taken to address the “increased costs caused by Brexit”. 21
In response to a parliamentary question concerned with the supply of
radioisotopes if the UK ends the transition period on 31 December

11
12

13
14
15
16
17
18

19

20

21

HCWS983, Energy Policy, 10 October 2018
Gov.uk, [CS Canada No.1/2018] UK/Canada: Agreement for Cooperation in the
Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, 12 November 2018
POSTnote 558, Supply of medical Radioisotopes, July 2017
European Commission, Supply of medical radioisotopes, [accessed 16 June 2020]
Supply of Medical Radioisotopes, POSTnote 558, July 2017
Some radioisotopes can also be produced in particle accelerators.
World Nuclear News, Radioisotopes in Medicine, May 2017
British Nuclear Medicine Society and Science & Technology Facilities Council, Future
Supply of Medical Radioisotopes for the UK, December 2014
For example, Dr Nicola Strickland, RCR statement on the potential impact of leaving
the Euratom treaty, Royal College of Radiologists, 10 July 2017
Jonathon Prynn and Joe Murphy, Tory rebellion goes nuclear: nine MPs oppose plan
to quit body that would ‘threaten supply of key cancer treatment material, Evening
Standard, 10 July 2017
Royal College of Radiologists, Prime Minister urged to clarify queries on radioisotope
transport and costs, 1 August 2019

9

Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

without a trade agreement, the Government said that in addition to its
objective of negotiating an agreement:
The Department will continue to work closely with the
pharmaceutical industry, the National Health Service and others in
the supply chain to help ensure patients can access the medicines
they need, and precautions are in place to reduce the likelihood of
future shortages. 22

For more information on radioisotopes, see the Library briefing paper on
Brexit and medicines regulation.

Research
The UK collaborates with the EU on a number of nuclear research
projects.
Horizon 2020
Euratom’s research and training (R&T) programme is aligned with
Horizon 2020. Horizon 2020 is the biggest EU Research and Innovation
programme to date with nearly €80 billion of funding available over 7
years (2014 to 2020) in addition to private investment – this is for many
sectors, not just nuclear. 23
Before Brexit, in August 2016 the Government announced it would
underwrite funding for approved Horizon 2020 projects applied for
before the UK left the EU, this included Euratom R&T funds. 24 In July
2018, the Treasury extended the Government’s guarantee to underwrite
the UK’s allocation for funding until the end of 2020. 25
Fusion: JET and ITER
The UK is also involved in EU nuclear fusion research as part of the JET
(Joint European Torus) and ITER (International Thermonuclear
Experimental Reactor) projects.
JET is a magnetic fusion device, designed to prove the feasibility of
fusion as an energy source. The project is based at Culham in
Oxfordshire. Euratom provides 87.5% of the funding for the project and
the UK Government provides the rest. 26
JET is helping to inform a larger fusion reactor – ITER - which is being
built in France. The UK’s future involvement in JET and ITER remain
subject to the negotiation. Government guidance states that from the
end of the transition period in January 2021, JET operations will
continue, but the UK will not be a member of the European
contribution to ITER. 27
A contract extension announced in March 2019 means the EU and UK
funding for JET will continue until the end of 2020. The UK Government
press release also stated that the contract “leaves open the option of a
22
23
24

25
26

27

PQ HL4534, 20 May 2020
European Commission, What is Horizon 2020? [accessed 16 June 2020]
Gov.uk, Chancellor Phillip Hammond guarantees EU funding beyond date UK leaves
EU, 13 August 2016
HCWS926, HM Government’s Guarantee, 24 July 2018
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Euratom Exit Factsheet,
Research and Development, June 2018
Gov.uk, Nuclear research from 1 January 2021, 13 August 2019

10 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

further extension to JET’s operations until 2024, which would enable it
to support ITER in the run-up to its launch in 2025”. 28
ITER has members beyond Europe (China, India, Korea, Russia, and the
United States). The ITER council has acknowledged “for decades, the UK
has been a leader in the global fusion research community” in a
statement on the possibility of future UK involvement in ITER. 29 UK
Government guidance states the UK will leave the European
contribution to ITER at the end of the transition period, but the
guidance doesn’t mention whether the UK will seek to rejoin as a nonEuropean member. In the short term, the ITER council and UK
Government have confirmed that current contracts with UK nationals
and operators will be considered valid until their contractually agreed
end date. 30

2.2 Negotiating positions for the Future
Relationship
Withdrawal agreement and Political declaration
The Withdrawal Agreement includes civil nuclear provisions relating to
nuclear safeguards, the ownership of materials and equipment, and
nuclear waste. 31 Detail on these provisions is set out in Section 4.12 in
the Library briefing paper on The UK’s EU Withdrawal Agreement (April
2019).
The Political Declaration on the Framework for Future EU-UK relations
includes references to nuclear safety, trade, research, and the supply of
radioisotopes. Detail on these provisions is set out in Section 4.13 in the
Library briefing paper on The Political Declaration on the Framework for
Future EU-UK Relations (December 2018).

EU and UK Future Relationship Negotiating
Positions
On 18 March 2020, the EU published a draft treaty 32 which included
provisions on civil nuclear. On 19 May 2020, the UK Government
published a series of documents setting out its approach to the
negotiations on the future relationship with the EU, including a draft
civil nuclear agreement. 33
There are broad areas of overlap between the two draft documents:
•

28
29
30
31

32

33

Safeguards: Within the current published draft texts, there is no
substantial difference between the positions on the safeguards
that will apply to the UK and EU as part of the future relationship.

Gov.uk, Future of JET secured with new European contract, 29 March 2019
ITER, Brexit – What should ITER expect?, 3 February 2020
Gov.uk, Nuclear research from 1 January 2021, 13 August 2019
The provisions on civil nuclear were unchanged between the May and Johnson
Withdrawal Agreements.
European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, 18 March 2020
UK negotiating team, Draft working text for an agreement […] on Cooperation in
the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy, 19 May 2020

11 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

•

Radioisotopes: Both texts include provisions on cooperation on
radioisotopes, in particular in relation to exchanging information
on the supply of radioisotopes.

•

Research: Both texts include provisions on cooperation on
nuclear research and development. The EU draft treaty states that
the UK may participate in Euratom programmes such as ITER, with
specific terms and conditions (such as financial contributions) to
be determined in accordance with the Treaty’s provisions for
Union programmes.

•

Other provisions: There is also overlap on technical provisions
such as enrichment and intellectual property.

The fourth round of negotiations were completed in June 2020. Both
Michel Barnier (representing the EU) 34 and David Frost (representing the
UK) 35 said overall progress had been limited.
Michel Barnier referred to civil nuclear cooperation as an area where he
considered the UK was seeking to “distance themselves” from the
“common basis” of the Political Declaration. Specifically, Barnier
referred to distance from the objective of “maintain[ing] existing high
standards of nuclear safety” (paragraph 66 of the Political
Declaration). 36
David Frost did not mention nuclear or energy in his statement after the
fourth round of negotiations. 37 However in a letter to Barnier in May
2020, Frost said that the UK’s legal texts “draw on precedent where
relevant precedents exist” and included the example of nuclear, “ our
draft civil nuclear agreement is very close to similar cooperation
agreements that Euratom (and indeed the UK) has concluded with other
third countries”. 38

Commentary
Most commentary on the UK’s relationship with Euratom was published
before the UK’s departure from Euratom. In December 2017, the House
of Commons Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) Committee
published its report on ‘Leaving the EU: implications for the civil nuclear
sector’. The report concluded:
The UK’s departure from Euratom is an apparently necessary but
unwanted consequence of exiting the European Union. The
Government’s task is to minimise the potential adverse impacts of
this departure. 39

34

35

36

37

38

39

European Commission, Statement by Michel Barnier following Round 4 of
negotiations for a new partnership between the European Union and the United
Kingdom, 5 June 2020
Gov.uk, No 10 media blog, David Frost’s statement following the conclusion of
round 4 of negotiations with the EU, 5 June 2020
European Commission, Statement by Michel Barnier following Round 4 of
negotiations for a new partnership between the European Union and the United
Kingdom, 5 June 2020
Gov.uk, No 10 media blog, David Frost’s statement following the conclusion of
round 4 of negotiations with the EU, 5 June 2020
Letter from David Frost to Michel Barnier regarding UK draft legal texts, 19 May
2020
House of Commons BEIS Committee, Leaving the EU: Implications for the civil
nuclear sector, Second Report of Session 2017-19, 12 December 2017, para. 4

12 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Overall the Committee recommended an association with Euratom that
replicates the existing functions. 40 The Government responded that it
wanted a “close and effective association with Euratom” but that the
nature of the relationship would be different, and subject to the
negotiations on the future relationship. 41
The Library briefing paper on Euratom includes more information on the
preparations the UK made for its departure from Euratom (in January
2020) along with details and commentary on the Government’s position
on the future relationship with Euratom.

40

41

House of Commons BEIS Committee, Leaving the EU: Implications for the civil
nuclear sector, Second Report of Session 2017-19, 12 December 2017, para. 43
House of Commons BEIS Committee, Leaving the EU: Implications for the civil
nuclear sector: Government response to the Committee’s Second Report, Sixth
Special Report of Session 2017-19, 6 March 2018, para 30

13 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

3. Energy
Numerous aspects of the UK energy sector could be affected by the
future relationship between the UK and EU. One of the key aspects, is
the trading of energy across interconnectors operating in the EU’s
internal energy market (IEM). Other aspects include energy efficiency,
and cooperation on renewable development.
This section sets out background on energy issues and provides the
positions of each party to these areas in the future relationship
negotiations.
Some of these areas, specifically the UK’s relationship with the IEM,
have implications for energy trading on the island of Ireland. This is
considered in Section 4.

3.1 The Internal Energy Market (IEM)
As part of the transition period, the UK remains part of the EU’s internal
energy market (IEM). The IEM allows harmonised, tariff-free trading of
gas and electricity across Europe (through interconnectors), leading to
lower prices and greater security of supply. 42
The UK Government has been “a leading advocate for the development
of the IEM and has heavily influenced the EU-wide rules, which draw on
UK practice.” 43 Energy trading, and the degree of UK participation in
the IEM, is being considered as part of the negotiations on the future
relationship.

Development of the IEM
During the 1990s, the EU and its Member States decided to liberalise
energy markets, opening them to competition gradually. The EU-led
changes, which have been developed through a series of legislative
packages affecting the gas and electricity sectors, initially followed the
more advanced liberalised status of the UK market:
•

The first liberalisation Directives were adopted in 1996 (electricity)
and 1998 (gas) and transposed into Member States' legal systems
by 1998 (electricity) and 2000 (gas).

•

The second liberalisation Directives were adopted in 2003 with
transposition of the Directives into national law by Member States
in 2004. In the UK, these Directives were transposed into law
largely by the Energy Act 2004.

•

Further measures have been introduced since to improve the
functioning of the market. This includes the what was known as
the third energy package, 44 transposed into UK law through the
Electricity and Gas (Internal Markets) Regulations 2011 for Great
Britain and separate regulations for Northern Ireland.

42

43

44

DexEU The United Kingdom’s exit from and new partnership with the European
Union White Paper, C9417, 2 February 2017, p. 43
House of Commons Exiting the EU Committee, Electricity and Renewables Sector
Report, 21 December 2017
European Commission, Third energy package, updated 16 March 2020

14 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

•

A further update to EU energy policy was completed in 2019 with
the ‘Clean energy for all Europeans’ package. In addition to
provisions on energy performance in buildings, renewable energy,
and energy efficiency, the package also contained elements
relating to electricity market design with the aim of making the
market “more flexible, more market-orientated, and better placed
to integrate a greater share of renewables”. 45

Whether and to what extent these and future EU regulations will apply
to the UK as part of the future relationship are subject to the outcome
of the negotiations.

UK energy trading
Interconnectors can operate in both directions, meaning they can
import and export electricity and gas. The UK exports some gas and
electricity through interconnectors at various points during the year, but
overall the UK is a net importer of both gas and electricity. The extent of
these imports has varied over time as the UK used to be a net exporter
of gas, but has been a net importer for more than a decade. Trends
over the last two decades are shown in the graph below.
In 2018, the UK imported 5.4% of its electricity through interconnectors
with EU or EEA countries (Norway, which is part of the IEM as an EEA
member), and 40.7% of its gas. The gas comes from both EU or EEA
interconnectors (85% of total gas imports) and LNG imports (4% of
LNG imports from Norway and the rest from non-EU/EEA countries). 46,47

Source: DBEIS, Digest of UK Energy Statistics 2019. Tables 5.5, 4.2 and G.5

45

46
47

European Commission, Clean energy for all Europeans package, updated 12 March
2020
Net imports as a percentage of total supply
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Digest of UK Energy
Statistics 2019. Tables 5.5 and G.5

15 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

Electricity interconnectors and the IEM
Great Britain has five completed electricity interconnectors with
mainland Europe and the island of Ireland providing around 5GW of
electricity interconnector capacity:
•

2GW to France (IFA);

•

1GW to the Netherlands (BritNed);

•

500MW to Northern Ireland (Moyle);

•

500MW to the Republic of Ireland (East West) and

•

1GW to Belgium (NEMO).

These are shown in the Figure below (reproduced with permission from
National Grid - the 1GW link to Belgium is now completed).

Source: Provided to the Library by National Grid, reproduced with permission.

In 2018, 67% of net electricity imports came from France, 32% from
the Netherlands and 1% from the interconnectors with Ireland. The
UK’s trading with the island of Ireland has fluctuated over time; in 2018
the island was a net importer of electricity from the UK. 48
Electricity interconnection capacity is due to nearly double by 2022 with
numerous projects under construction, and further projects have sought
regulatory approval. 49 The May Government’s 2017 Clean Growth
Strategy set out the Government’s support for 9GW more capacity than
was currently operational or under construction at the time. 50
The IEM facilitates harmonised tariff-free trade across these electricity
interconnectors (see Box 1). The flow of electricity between
48
49
50

Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Energy Trends. Table 5.6
Ofgem, Electricity interconnectors, [accessed: 15 June 2020]
HM Treasury, Autumn Statement 2016, 23 November 2016; and HM Government,
Clean Growth Strategy, October 2017

16 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

interconnected markets is driven by cost differentials. When the price of
electricity is lower in one market, energy will flow from that market to
the higher priced market. The effect of this is to make the prices in each
converge – i.e. they increase in the exporting market and decrease in
the importing market.
As wholesale gas and electricity prices in the UK are generally higher
than elsewhere in Europe, interconnection has caused a reduction in
wholesale prices, and hence consumer prices, in the UK. 51
Interconnector cables also provide flexibility that can help to integrate
intermittent renewable sources of electricity into power systems. This is
because they prevent the need to curtail (i.e. disconnect from the grid)
this power when supply is greater than demand by exporting any excess
power. 52
Box 1: The IEM and Market Coupling
As part of the development of the IEM, trade across electricity interconnectors is increasingly
integrated via ‘market coupling’. Market coupling uses an algorithm to set prices and trading
volumes across interconnected markets. Markets are said to be coupled when interconnector
capacity and electricity are sold in a single market transaction, whereas in uncoupled markets
these are sold separately. 53 Market coupling is a more efficient means of trading, which
reduces system costs. Decoupling markets can therefore increase the costs of imports.
Great Britain is currently coupled to north-west Europe and the island of Ireland in the ‘dayahead market’ (referring to electricity that is bought and sold a day ahead of delivery). Several
EU countries are also coupled on the ‘intraday’ markets (for electricity that is sold between an
hour and 24 hours ahead of delivery) 54 and work is underway for further countries to couple
with the EU intraday market.
The UK has set out its position on maintaining and extending its market coupling in its draft
energy agreement (see section 3.4).

More information on electricity interconnectors is available from the
Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology’s note on Overseas
Electricity Interconnection (February 2018).

Gas interconnectors
The UK imports natural gas via pipelines from Norway, the Netherlands
and Belgium (all IEM members) and by ship in the form of Liquefied
Natural Gas (LNG). As most LNG comes from outside the EU (from
countries such as Qatar), this section discusses interconnectors (with EU
and EEA countries) only.
As domestic gas production from the North Sea has declined, imports
have risen. In the years from 2012 the UK has imported 25-40% of its
51

52
53

54

Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology, Overseas Electricity Interconnection,
February 2018.
Library briefing paper, Electricity grids, 8 January 2019
Antony Froggatt et al, Staying Connected: Key Elements for UK–EU27 Energy
Cooperation After Brexit, Chatham House, May 2017
Antony Froggatt et al, Staying Connected: Key Elements for UK–EU27 Energy
Cooperation After Brexit, Chatham House, May 2017

17 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

gas supply via interconnectors. 55 Trends in imports from each country
are illustrated in the graph below.

Source: DBEIS, Digest of UK Energy Statistics 2019. Table G.5

Not all of this gas originates in those countries, some may have first
been imported from other countries, such as Russia, as the figure below
shows. There are no market coupling mechanisms for gas, but it is still
regulated in accordance with EU Legislation.

Source: Reproduced from Department for Business, Energy and Industrial
Strategy, Digest of UK Energy Statistics, 2018

IEM regulation and governance
55

Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Digest of UK Energy
Statistics 2019. Table G.5

18 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

The rules of the IEM (known as European Network Codes - ENCs) are
determined by European Network Transmission Systems Operators
(ENTSOs), European Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators
(ACER) and the European Commission (see Box 2).
ENCs are ultimately upheld by the Court of the European Union (ECJ).
Ending the jurisdiction of the ECJ in the UK has been a key part of the
UK Government’s approach to Brexit. 56 The UK Government has
proposed alternative governance and dispute arbitration mechanisms
for the future relationship (see section 3.4).
Integration with the IEM could require the UK’s compliance with current
and future EU energy market rules, as well as some EU environmental
legislation. 57
Box 2: IEM governing bodies
A number of European bodies coordinate national energy institutions at the European level to help the
IEM function.
ACER
Regulation (EC) No 713/2009 established the Agency for Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER),
which has been fully operational since March 2011. ACER is largely responsible for promoting
cooperation between national regulatory authorities at regional and European level and for monitoring
development of the network and the internal electricity and gas markets.
Ofgem (the GB energy regulator) 58 and the Utility Regulator (the Northern Ireland energy regulator) are
currently members of ACER.
ENTSO
Two EU Regulations created structures of cooperation for European Network Transmission Systems
Operators (ENTSOs): Regulation EC/714/2009 for electricity; and Regulation EC/715/2009 for gas. The
ENTSOs, together with ACER, form detailed network access rules and technical codes, and ensure
coordination of grid operation through the exchange of operational information and the development
of common safety and emergency standards and procedures.
UK Transmission System Operators, such as National Grid, are currently members of ENTSO-E and
ENTSO-G. 59

3.2 Considerations for the Future
Relationship
The UK’s future participation in the IEM remains subject to the outcome
of the future relationship negotiations (see section 3.4). It is important
to note that whatever the outcome, interconnector trading is expected
to continue: a number of countries outside of the EU currently trade
energy through interconnectors with the EU. The EU does not currently
apply tariffs to these imports. 60
56

57

58
59

60

Gov.uk, The government’s negotiating objectives for exiting the EU: PM speech, 17
January 2017
Lords EU Committee, Brexit: energy security, 10th Report of Session 2017-19, HL
Paper 63, 29 January 2018, para. 70
Ofgem, Ofgem and Europe, [accessed: 16 June 2020]
A full listing of Member Transmission System Operators is available on the ENTSO- E
website and the ENTSO-G website.
Gustav Frederiksson, Alexander Roth, Simone Tagliapietra, Georg Zachmann, The
Impact of Brexit on the EU Energy System, 23 November 2017, p. 25

19 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

However there may be other costs to a different relationship with the
IEM. These costs have the potential to impact EU countries, who either
export or import energy from the UK, as well as the UK itself.
Cost of Energy
Leaving the IEM may cause an increase in the cost of energy imports.
One estimate given by National Grid to the House of Commons
Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) Committee, in 2017, was
that “UK consumers could face £500 million a year of costs by the early
2020s as a result of being outside the IEM”. This estimate was described
by Paul Hallas, Director of Regulation and Strategy at Centrica, as “at
the bleak end of the plausible envelope of possible outcomes. 61
Any extra cost is largely due to the likelihood the UK would need to be
de-coupled from the EU market, making trading less efficient and more
expensive (see Box 1).
Energy security
The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) and
the energy regulator Ofgem produce an annual Statutory Security of
Supply report. The 2019 report said leaving the EU did not pose an
energy security threat:
The UK’s exit from the EU will not alter the fact that our energy
system is resilient and secure and drawn from a number of
sources. GB has one of the most reliable energy systems in the
world and we remain confident in maintaining our secure energy
supply. 62

However, it is possible that in future, in the event of leaving the IEM,
the UK’s plans for further interconnectors could be more difficult. 63
More interconnectors are of benefit to the UK to increase the flexibility
and resilience of grids, especially with increasing supply from
intermittent renewable energy sources. For more information, see the
Library briefing paper on Electricity grids.
Influence on rules
Depending on the relationship the UK negotiates with the EU in relation
to the IEM, the UK’s influence on future rules may change (see Box 2).
In May 2017, the BEIS Committee recommended that the Government
“seek continued UK influence over the rules of the IEM [and] explore
continued full membership of the technical institutions for developing
the detailed rules of the Internal Energy Market.” 64
In January 2018, the Lords EU environment and energy sub-committee’s
report on Energy Security said, “there is strong support across the
energy industry for the UK to continue to participate in the Internal
Energy Market (IEM) post-Brexit.” However, witnesses stated that if
61

62
63

64

BEIS Committee, Leaving the EU: negotiation priorities for energy and climate
change policy, Fourth Report of Session 2016–17, HC 909, 2 May 2017, p. 12
BEIS and Ofgem, Statutory Security of Supply Report 2019, 2019
Andrew Ward, Our friends electric: interconnection and Brexit, Financial Times, 15
January 2018
BEIS Committee, Leaving the EU: negotiation priorities for energy and climate
change policy, Fourth Report of Session 2016–17, HC 909, 2 May 2017, para. 39

20 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

remaining in the IEM required the UK to comply with all EU standards,
and potentially losing their representation ability to influence the IEM,
then the UK would need to review the pros and cons of remaining in
the IEM in that situation. 65

3.3 Other energy impacts
While trade over interconnectors is a key part of the energy aspects
under consideration in the future relationship negotiations, there may
also be implications for some other areas of energy policy.

Energy efficiency
Energy efficiency regulations limit the amount of energy that products
consume which can reduce costs for consumers and reduce energyrelated emissions. Before the Brexit referendum, there were press
reports that supported the case to leave the EU, as it would allow the
UK to remove EU energy efficiency laws on household items such as
vacuum cleaners and lightbulbs. 66
Existing EU energy efficiency directives have been implemented into UK
law and so continue to apply now the UK has left the EU. The UK
Government’s domestic policy, before Brexit and at present, is to keep
costs down for consumers, and also to meet emissions targets (see
section 5 below). The Government has said that after the transition
period ends, the UK will meet or exceed existing product standards:
From 1 January 2021, the UK will uphold common high product
standards wherever possible and appropriate, or even exceed
them where it is in the UK’s interest to do so.
All EU ecodesign and energy labelling requirements which enter
into force and apply before 31 December 2020 will have effect in
the UK. Further legislation is being prepared to ensure that all of
these requirements continue to function in the UK from 1 January
2021. 67

Trade
There has been some concern that Brexit could affect investor
confidence, the movement of industry specialists, or the import/export
of materials linked to renewable energy technologies. 68
The House of Lords EU Energy and Environment sub-Committee has
cautioned that any possible tariffs on products used in the construction
and maintenance of the energy system could affect the energy
industry. 69 This possible impact on new energy infrastructure has also

65

66

67
68

69

Lords EU Committee, Brexit: energy security, 10th Report of Session 2017-19, HL
Paper 63, 29 January 2018
20 reasons you should vote to leave the European Union, The Telegraph, 22 June
2016
BEIS, Meeting climate change requirements from 1 January 2021, 28 April 2020
Jonathan Gaventa, The impact of Brexit on Europe’s energy and climate transition,
E3G, 30 June 2017
Lords EU Committee, Brexit: energy security, 10th Report of Session 2017-19, HL
Paper 63, 29 January 2018, para. 85

21 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

been reported in the media, with concerns raised about projects such as
Hinkley Point in relation to general trade and movement of labour. 70
The impact of these potential issues will depend on any trade
arrangements agreed as part of the future relationship negotiations.
The professional services firm EY’s 2018 Renewable Energy Country
Attractiveness Index, which ranks 40 countries based on the
attractiveness of their clean energy markets to investors, saw the UK slip
one place from 7th to 8th, with Brexit referred to as being one of the
possible causes. 71 However in the most recent Index (May 2020), the UK
rose to 6th place with new policies on renewable energy credited for the
rise. 72

3.4 Negotiating positions for the Future
Relationship
2018 White Paper and previous Withdrawal
Agreement
The May Government’s July 2018 White Paper on the Future
Relationship between the UK and the EU made no commitment on the
IEM and contained options to either leave or remain in the market. The
paper said the UK was seeking “broad energy cooperation with the EU”
and wanted to “explore the options” on the IEM. This included options
of leaving and maintaining trading or retaining access and using a
common rulebook for certain technical rules, though not, in the UK’s
view, for wider environmental and climate change rules. 73
The Withdrawal Agreement negotiated by the May Government was
not ratified and was superseded by the 2019 Withdrawal Agreement
(below). The provisions on energy trading were the same in both texts.

Withdrawal Agreement and Political Declaration
While the Withdrawal Agreement did not mention the IEM (other than
in the Northern Ireland Protocol – see section 4 below) the Political
Declaration setting out the framework for the future relationship
between the EU and the UK stated there should be mechanisms to
ensure “security of supply” and “efficient trade over interconnectors
over different timeframes”. 74
More information on the provisions relating to energy in these
documents are available in Section 8.6 of the Library briefing paper on
The UK’s EU Withdrawal Agreement (April 2019) and 4.13 of the paper
70

71

72

73

74

Rob Davies, Energy projects including Hinkley Point threatened by Brexit, experts
warn, The Guardian, 5 April 2017
EY, Renewable Energy Country Attractiveness Index, Issue 52. The UK remained in
8th place in 2019.
Jillian Ambrose, Renewable energy investors increasingly look to UK, says report, The
Guardian, 19 May 2020
HM Government, The Future Relationship between the United Kingdom and the
European Union, 12 July 2018, Cm 9593, para 137-142
The Political Declaration also made specific reference to ENTSO but omitted ACER
while the latter is included in the Northern Ireland Protocol of the Withdrawal
Agreement relating to the Single Electricity Market (see below) but the former is not.

22 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

on The Political Declaration on the Framework for Future EU-UK
Relations (December 2018).

EU and UK Future Relationship Negotiating
Positions
On 25 February 2020, the EU published negotiating directives for the
future relationship, 75 including on electricity and gas. Detailed provisions
building on these principles were included in the EU draft treaty
published on 18 March 2020 76 (these texts refer to energy with raw
materials, this paper focuses on energy).
While the EU negotiating directives state clearly that “the UK will leave
the internal market in energy”, the EU documents suggest a future
partnership covering areas such as investment in renewable and energy
efficiency technologies, measures to maintain competitive markets, and
the efficient use of interconnectors.
The UK Government published its approach to the negotiations in
February 2020. 77 On 19 May 2020, the UK Government published a
series of documents setting out its approach to the negotiations on the
future relationship with the EU, including a draft energy agreement. 78
The UK position has some areas of broad overlap with the EU position,
such as promoting renewable energy and energy efficiency, maintaining
market-based prices, and some provisions relating to the efficient
trading on interconnectors.
However there are some areas of difference, including on the detail of
IEM integration, cooperation and membership of relevant bodies
(ENTSO and ACER), and governance. 79 Some of the key areas in the
texts are:
•

Renewable energy and energy efficiency: Both texts refer to
support for renewable and energy efficiency technologies. The UK
text has provisions on climate change (see section 5 below) which
includes cooperation on trade and investment in renewable
energy and energy efficiency goods. The EU text is more detailed,
including a requirement to establish targets for renewable energy
and energy efficiency in line with those that the UK already has as
an EU member, promote, and cooperate on regulation and
research on energy efficiency and renewable energy.

•

Efficient use of interconnectors: While both texts include
provisions for gas and electricity balancing and trading, including
avoiding barriers to cross-border trading, they differ on detail.
Both include provisions on interconnector capacity allocation,

75

Council of the European Union, Directives for the negotiation of a new partnership
with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 25 February 2020
European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, 18 March 2020
HM Government, The Future Relationship with the EU – The UK’s Approach to
Negotiations, February 2020
UK Negotiating Team, Draft working text for an agreement on energy, 19 May 2020
Detailed information on the provisions in the UK draft energy agreement are
available in the Scottish Parliament Information Centre’s (SPICe) paper on EU-UK
Future Relationship Negotiations – UK Legal Text Special, 2 June 2020

76

77

78
79

23 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

congestion management, no network charges, and participating
in compensation mechanisms. The UK text also contains technical
provisions for trade in electricity which are not included in the EU
text, including the use of balancing platforms and market
coupling over different timeframes (see Box 1). The draft
agreement includes an Annex of the Regulations that would
continue to apply in GB as requirements for the UK’s balancing
and trading proposals.
•

Participation in bodies: The UK text states that UK bodies will
participate as observers in meetings of ENTSO-G and ACER and
members of ENTSO-E. The EU text states the parties will develop
working arrangements for cooperation with ENSTO-E, ENTSO-G
and ACER though states clearly that this shall not involve
membership of these bodies (see Box 2).

•

Offshore energy: Both texts refer to cooperation in development
of offshore energy. The UK text refers to the parties supporting
the other’s “full participation” in voluntary structures established
for such cooperation between the North Sea Countries. This may
refer to The North Sea Energy Cooperation which the UK
reportedly wished to attend after its departure as part of EU
Withdrawal. The EU text refers only to cooperation on such
projects through “sharing best practice” and “facilitating the
development” of specific projects.

•

Governance: The UK text includes provisions for a framework for
consultation and dispute resolution, including the use of a Panel
of Experts, and the establishment of an Energy Cooperation
Group to administer the Agreement. The EU text does not include
either proposal. Instead for all sectors, the EU proposes a joint EUUK governing body (the Partnership Council) with specialised
sectoral committees. More information on the differing
negotiating positions on Governance and other areas is available
in the Library briefing paper on The UK-EU future relationship
negotiations: summary of positions.

•

Other provisions: there is also broad overlap between the two
texts on some further provisions of energy trading. Both include
commitments on the exchange of information, market-based
prices, and non-discriminatory access to energy transport
infrastructure, and requirements for transparent system operators
and independent regulatory authorities. The EU text contains
further provisions not covered by the UK text, such as on the
exploration and production of energy goods, offshore risk and
safety, gas preventative action plans and emergency plans, and
electricity risk preparedness.

Statements from the negotiating parties have indicated that there may
be differences of opinion regarding energy in the negotiations. In his 15
May remarks following Round 3 of negotiations, EU chief negotiator
Michel Barnier included electricity interconnectors in a list of what he
regarded as the “many areas [where the UK is] looking to maintain the
benefits of being a Member State, without the obligations”. Specifically,
Barnier said the UK’s demands included “to obtain electricity

24 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

interconnection mechanisms equivalent to the Single Market – ‘existing
arrangements’ as the UK says.” 80
From the UK side, in a 24 April 2020 Statement in response to the
second round of negotiations, the UK Government listed energy as a
core area of a Free Trade Agreement where that had been some
“promising convergence”. 81
The fourth round of negotiations were completed in June 2020. While
neither Michel Barnier (representing the EU) 82 nor David Frost
(representing the UK) 83 specifically mentioned energy in their respective
statements, both said overall progress had been limited.
Examples of energy agreements between the EU and other non-EU
members are set out in Box 3 below.

Commentary
Before the UK’s departure from the European Union, stakeholders
expressed support for continued participation in the IEM. In January
2018, the Lords EU environment and energy sub-committee’s report on
Energy Security said “none of our witnesses expressed a desire to leave
the IEM” and concluded “there is strong support across the energy
industry for the UK to continue to participate in the Internal Energy
Market (IEM) post-Brexit.” The key benefits cited by witnesses were the
efficiency savings made from market coupling and options to exchange
information. 84
In response to the publication of the February 2020 draft EU treaty and
May 2020 draft UK energy agreement on the future relationship, EU
and UK energy trade bodies released a statement calling for “an
efficient future energy EU-UK relationship”. This commented on several
areas of the texts, including calling or cooperation and collaborating
between regulators and system operators through UK participation of
bodies such as ACER, ENTSO, and further details on maintaining
collaboration on offshore projects in the North Sea. On electricity and
gas trading, this stated further details were needed on how to maintain
efficient trading:
Efficient cross-border trading, supported by harmonised trading
rules and regulatory cooperation, supports security of supply and
low energy bills for all consumers, while helping to balance the
penetration of renewable generation. So we welcome that both
sides agree on the need and the benefits of efficient and costeffective trading over interconnectors. Further details are needed
on how this can be achieved with clear and transparent rules that
do not discriminate. We would suggest that the framework

80

81
82

83

84

European Commission, Remarks by Michel Barnier following Round 3 of
negotiations for a new partnership between the EU and the UK, 15 May 2020
No 10 media blog, Statement on Round Two of UK-EU negotiations, 24 April 2020
European Commission, Statement by Michel Barnier following Round 4 of
negotiations for a new partnership between the European Union and the United
Kingdom, 5 June 2020
Gov.uk, No 10 media blog, David Frost’s statement following the conclusion of
round 4 of negotiations with the EU, 5 June 2020
Lords EU Committee, Brexit: energy security, 10th Report of Session 2017-19, HL
Paper 63, 29 January 2018

25 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

presented in the UK legal text is more likely to achieve such an
outcome. 85

Box 3: Existing energy agreements
The EU states clearly in its negotiating directives Q&A that there are no other countries that have energy
relationship models with the EU that are directly comparable with what is being sought by the UK:
In the area of electricity and gas, there is no precedent for this type of arrangement.
The Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology’s note on Overseas Electricity Interconnection set
out that some non-Member states participate in the IEM, to varying levels of integration. For example,
EEA members participate fully. They must adopt and automatically update a substantial amount of EU
energy and environment legislation to do so. The IEM’s legal framework falls under the jurisdiction of
the European Court of Justice.
The House of Lords EU Committee’s 2018 report on Brexit and Energy Security, considered the models
for Norway and Switzerland:
•
•

Norway, as an EEA and EFTA member, is also a member of the IEM. The Committee said a similar
agreement would bring benefits but noted the Government had ruled it out.
Switzerland has access to European energy markets through bilateral agreements, though it is
excluded from market coupling (see Box 1). As part of this, Switzerland accepts some EU
regulations, including the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice. Switzerland sits physically
at the centre of the EU energy system and is a key transit country for energy trading with over 40
interconnectors to its neighbours.

The Committee quotes the Head of International Energy Affairs at the Swiss Federal Office of Energy Jean-Christophe Füeg - as saying that Switzerland’s exclusion from market coupling resulted in “trade
between Switzerland and the rest of is handled in a suboptimal way”. Füeg also reflected on
participating in the IEM:
The EU wants to have an internal electricity market as one coherent thing, and either you are in it
and abide by the rules or you are not in it. [For an exception to be made,] you have to have a
very strong case that you as a country bring something to the internal electricity market that is
indispensable to the functioning of the energy market […] I am not aware of the UK having
anything that I would call a unique selling point; that is, something that you would bring to the
IEM, both electricity and gas, which in the countervailing scenario of you not bringing it to the
market would put the IEM in some sort of jeopardy.
Conversely, the Minister, Richard Harrington MP, highlighted three features unique to the UK:
The first is bulk—our size relative to the Swiss and, therefore, our importance to the Single
Market. The second is history—the fact that we helped to form it. Thirdly, there is the fact that we
are already in it, unlike the Swiss, who are not.
On the Swiss experience relating to the UK, the Committee concluded that:
The Swiss experience shows that mutual benefits and a history within the system are no
guarantee of EU energy market access. While the Government appears confident that a postBrexit energy relationship with the EU will favour the UK, we are concerned that this confidence
is based on a misplaced expectation of pragmatism and that broader political considerations may
affect the degree to which the UK can engage with the IEM post-Brexit.

85

Energy UK, EU and UK trade bodies call for an efficient future energy EU-UK
relationship, 3 June 2020

26 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Other agreements also exist, such as the Energy Community, a multilateral framework between nine
Southeast and East European countries and the EU to integrate their energy markets. However, the key
objective of the Energy Community is to extend the EU internal energy market rules and principles
beyond on the basis of a legally binding framework called the Energy Community Acquis.

27 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

4. Implications for the island of
Ireland
Energy policy is largely devolved to the Northern Ireland Executive, and
the sector has different characteristics to those in Great Britain. This
means there are specific energy policy issues. Some issues have been
addressed in the Withdrawal Agreement, but there are also possible
impacts from the UK’s relationship with the IEM (above) which will be
addressed as part of the future relationship negotiations.
Background information is available in the Northern Ireland Assembly
Research and Information Service Briefing paper on Withdrawal
Agreement, Protocol and Political Declaration – potential implications
for the Single Electricity Market in Northern Ireland (May 2020).

4.1 The Single Electricity Market (SEM)
Since 2007, the island of Ireland has operated with a Single Electricity
Market (SEM). This allows free trade of power across the island, with all
generators and suppliers trading through a central mandatory wholesale
market. It is regulated jointly by the Commission for Energy Regulation
(CER) from the Republic of Ireland, and the Utility Regulator from
Northern Ireland. 86 The decision-making body which governs the market
is the SEM Committee. This body consists of the CER, the Utility
Regulator as well as an independent member (who also has a deputy).
The SEM is established in national law in both the UK and Ireland, and is
not the result of laws transposed directly from any EU-level legislation.
However, the SEM has undergone significant change in order to comply
with wider EU legislation and existing arrangements have (as of October
2018) been replaced by an enhanced wholesale market. This market has
been called the Integrated Single Electricity Market or I-SEM, though as
the enhanced market is still commonly referred to as the SEM, this
paper will use the terms interchangeably. 87
I-SEM is designed closely around the rules of the Internal Energy Market
(IEM), meaning it uses market coupling for trading energy established by
the European Network Codes, as described above.
The imports and exports of electricity between GB, Northern Ireland and
Ireland (ROI) have fluctuated over time. In 2018, the island of Ireland
was a net importer of electricity from the UK: the ROI is a net importer
of electricity from Northern Ireland but is overall a net exporter to the
UK through the Wales interconnector and Northern Ireland is a net
importer of electricity from the Scottish Moyle Link even though it also
exports to ROI. 88

86
87

88

CER Factsheet on the Single Electricity Market, April 2011
Information note, Proposed Amendment to the Electricity Regulation (Amendment)
(Single Market) Act 2007
Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Energy Trends. Table 5.6

28 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Considerations for the Future Relationship
The Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland in the Withdrawal Agreement
provides for the continuation of the SEM after the transition period
ends, including continued participation by Northern Ireland operators in
the EU emissions trading scheme. More detail on the provisions in the
Protocol is set out in section 4.2 below
While the Protocol facilitates the continued operation of the SEM, the
UK’s future relationship with the IEM could impact the SEM. As the
island of Ireland’s only physical connections for gas and electricity to
mainland Europe are via GB, the future of energy trading between the
UK and the EU is key for the future of electricity import efficiency and
security on the island. The Northern Ireland Assembly Research and
Information service summarise the issue in their May 2020 paper on the
SEM:
The UK Government [states] that from 1 January 2021 cross
border flows into and out of GB will no longer be governed by EU
legislation. This means that new trading relationships may be
required for trade between the GB market and the SEM via
interconnectors. The extent to which new arrangements are
necessary will depend on the outcome of the future relationship
negotiations between the UK and the EU and any agreement
reached on electricity trade. The UK Government, however, has
stated that “trade on interconnectors may be less efficient” after
the transition period. 89

Unlike the electricity sector, the gas markets of the Republic of Ireland
and Northern Ireland are separate. The Republic of Ireland’s gas sector
relies on imports of gas through Great Britain. This reliance on imports
highlights that any future relationship on energy will be important not
only for the UK’s demand for energy, but also the flow of energy from
the UK to EU countries such as Ireland. 9091 Gas trading was not covered
in the Withdrawal Agreement, but is referred to in the UK’s draft energy
agreement 92 (see below).

4.2 Negotiating positions for the Future
Relationship
Following the EU referendum vote, representatives from both Northern
Ireland and Ireland stressed that energy, and the SEM, should be a
priority in the Brexit negotiations to prevent any risks to the market. 93‘ 94

89

90

91

92
93

94

Northern Ireland Assembly Research and Information Service Briefing paper,
Withdrawal Agreement, Protocol and Political Declaration – potential implications for
the Single Electricity Market in Northern Ireland, May 2020
Department for the Economy, Northern Ireland Executive (BES0059), November
2017
Irish Government, Ireland and the negotiations on the UK’s withdrawal from the
European Union The Government’s Approach, May 2017, p. 38
UK Negotiating Team, Draft working text for an agreement on energy, 19 May 2020
Northern Ireland Executive Office, Letter to Prime Minister from First Minister and
Deputy First Minister, 10 August 2016
Irish Government, Ireland and the negotiations on the UK’s withdrawal from the
European Union The Government’s Approach, May 2017, p. 38

29 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

2018 White Paper and previous Withdrawal
Agreement
The May Government’s July 2018 White Paper on the Future
Relationship between the UK and the EU said the Government was
“committed to facilitating the continuation of the SEM” and would
“work with the EU to ensure the SEM is maintained in any scenario.” 95
The 2018 Withdrawal Agreement negotiated between the May
Government and the EU included a reference to the SEM in the
Ireland/Northern Ireland Protocol. The Protocol stated that some EU law
governing wholesale electricity markets would continue to apply, should
the protocol come into force. The legislation related to the generation,
transportation and wholesale and cross-border trading of electricity, but
not retail markets or consumer protection. The legislation included the
rules for the IEM, the Directive that established ACER, the industrial
emissions Directive on pollution prevention and control, and the
Directive establishing the EU emissions trading scheme (EU ETS). This
Withdrawal Agreement was not ratified and was superseded by the
2019 Withdrawal Agreement.
More information on the approach to energy in the previous
Withdrawal Agreement is available in Section 8.6 of the Library briefing
paper on The UK’s EU Withdrawal Agreement (April 2019)

The Withdrawal Agreement and Political
Declaration
The Johnson Government renegotiated the Withdrawal Agreement in
2019. This new Withdrawal Agreement was ratified by both Parties and
entered into force on 1 February 2020.
The provisions relating to the SEM remained the same as the previous
Withdrawal Agreement, but the implementation of the Ireland/Northern
Ireland Protocol changed. Under the May Government, the protocol was
described as a “back-stop” and was a temporary position in the case of
no agreement at the end of the transition period. The Johnson
renegotiation means the protocol will come into force at the end of the
transition period and be the permanent end state for Northern Ireland,
unless the Northern Ireland Assembly votes to change it. This means the
SEM will continue to operate across the island of Ireland at the end of
the transition period and Northern Ireland will remain subject to certain
EU rules. 96
The Political Declaration does not specifically mention the SEM, though
contains general provisions on “cooperation” on electricity and gas
trading between the parties (see section 3.4).
Both the EU and UK have published documents on the implementation
of the Protocol. The EU document urges the UK to provide details and
95

96

HM Government, The Future Relationship between the United Kingdom and the
European Union, 12 July 2018, Cm 9593, para 138
Background information on the Northern Ireland protocol is available in the Library
insight on Brexit and the Northern Ireland border.

30 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

timelines for implementation. 97 The UK document states the Protocol
will be implemented by the Northern Ireland Executive with support
from the UK Government, though does not give timelines. 98
The House of Lords EU Select Committee published a report on The
Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland in May 2020 stating:
We welcome the commitment in Article 9 and Annex 4 of the
Protocol to the continuation of the Single Electricity Market on the
island of Ireland. This will benefit Northern Ireland and Ireland in
terms of energy security, decarbonisation and energy prices. 99

EU and UK Future Relationship Negotiating
Positions
On 18 March 2020, the EU published a draft treaty including provisions
on energy trading. 100 On 19 May 2020, the UK Government published a
series of documents setting out its approach to the negotiations on the
future relationship with the EU, including a draft energy agreement. 101
The Single Electricity Market is not specifically mentioned in either the
EU draft treaty, or the UK draft agreement on energy. However, as
explained further above, as the island’s only physical connections for gas
and electricity to mainland Europe are via GB, the provisions related to
the IEM (section 3 above) will likely be relevant to the SEM.
The UK’s approach to the negotiations, published in February 2020,
does refer to the SEM:
The UK has undertaken domestic preparations to enable trade in
electricity and gas over the interconnectors to continue from 1
January 2021 without an energy agreement. Existing
arrangements, including work carried out with regulators and
Transmissions System Operators, will ensure security of energy
supply is unaffected. In Northern Ireland, the Ireland/Northern
Ireland Protocol to the Withdrawal Agreement provides the basis
for the continued operation of the Single Electricity Market.
An energy agreement covering electricity and gas trading could
improve these baseline arrangements by:
a. facilitating efficient cross-border electricity and gas trade;
b. facilitating technical cooperation between electricity and
gas network operators and organisations in the planning
and use of energy infrastructure connecting their systems;
and
c. supporting the integration of renewable power and
investment in decarbonisation projects in the north seas.

The UK draft energy agreement does make a reference to the
continuation of supply of natural gas, stating its provisions apply
“without prejudice to the obligations that apply between the United
European Commission, Technical note on the implementation of the Protocol on
Ireland/Northern Ireland, 30 April 2020
98
Cabinet Office, The UK’s Approach to the Northern Ireland Protocol, May 2020
99
House of Lords European Union Committee, The Protocol on Ireland/Northern
Ireland, 1 June 2020, para 208
100
European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, 18 March 2020
101
UK Negotiating Team, Draft working text for an agreement on energy, 19 May 2020
97

31 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

Kingdom and Ireland under the United Kingdom and Ireland natural gas
treaties.” 102
The fourth round of negotiations were completed in June 2020. While
neither Michel Barnier (representing the EU) 103 nor David Frost
(representing the UK) 104 specifically mentioned energy in their respective
statements, both said overall progress had been limited.

Commentary
In response to the publication of EU and UK texts on the future
relationship, EU and UK energy trade bodies released a statement,
including concerns for the SEM:
While the Northern Ireland Protocol protects the SEM on the
island of Ireland, it is limited to the functioning on the island and
does not cover the trading between the SEM and Great Britain.
This means that as it stands there are no arrangements in place to
maintain the Day-ahead market between GB and Ireland and no
mechanisms to enable the collaboration of GB and SEM regulators
on cross-border matters. The Energy deal will need to address
these deficiencies to ensure that Ireland continues to function
according the IEM rules and to ensure that customers on the
island of Ireland are not penalised with higher prices resulting
from lesser levels of efficiency and segmented, less liquid markets.
The wind resources that can be activated in Ireland are greater
than are likely to be used in Ireland, so the decarbonisation of
Europe overall is advanced by enabling integration and
cooperation. 105

The Northern Ireland Assembly Research and Information Service
briefing paper on the SEM (May 2020) prepared for the NI Committee
for the Economy, identified numerous questions on the implementation
of the Protocol for the SEM. These included possible impacts on security
of supply and end user prices from potential inefficient interconnection,
implementation of EU law in Northern Ireland, and scrutiny of future
cooperation. 106
Before the UK left the EU, a number of select committees assessed the
potential impact of Brexit on the SEM. The House of Commons
Northern Ireland Affairs Committee 107 and BEIS Committee each
recommended that the Government protect the continued operation of
SEM. 108 The House of Lords EU and Environment Sub-Committee
concluded that the “complexity of maintaining the I-SEM will increase
significantly” if the UK leaves the IEM and said the UK should plan for
UK Negotiating Team, Draft working text for an agreement on energy, 19 May 2020
European Commission, Statement by Michel Barnier following Round 4 of
negotiations for a new partnership between the European Union and the United
Kingdom, 5 June 2020
104
Gov.uk, No 10 media blog, David Frost’s statement following the conclusion of
round 4 of negotiations with the EU, 5 June 2020
105
Energy UK, EU and UK trade bodies call for an efficient future energy EU-UK
relationship, 3 June 2020
106
Northern Ireland Assembly Research and Information Service Briefing paper,
Withdrawal Agreement, Protocol and Political Declaration – potential implications for
the Single Electricity Market in Northern Ireland, May 2020
107
Northern Ireland Affairs Committee, Electricity sector in Northern Ireland, Third
Report of Session 2016–17, HC 51, 26 April 2017
108
BEIS Committee, Leaving the EU: negotiation priorities for energy and climate
change policy, Fourth Report of Session 2016–17, HC909, 2 May 2017
102
103

32 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

this eventuality, including by considering whether to devolve additional
powers to Northern Ireland. 109

109

Lords EU Committee, Brexit: energy security, 10th Report of Session 2017-19, HL
Paper 63, 29 January 2018, para.149-150

33 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

5. Climate Change
The UK is part of an international effort to combat climate change.
Both the UK and the EU are parties to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and as such have signed up
to international climate change obligations, such as the Kyoto Protocol
and the Paris Agreement.
As part of its contributions to international efforts, the UK has domestic
legislation and policies in place to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The
Climate Change Act 2008 originally established long term statutory
targets for the UK to achieve an 80% reduction in greenhouse gases by
2050 against a 1990 baseline (translated into five-yearly carbon
budgets). In June 2019, the Government amended this headline target
to a 100% reduction (compared to 1990 levels) by 2050 (otherwise
known as net zero). Since 1990, the UK has cut greenhouse gas
emissions by 40%. 110 Further discussion of the UK carbon budgets and
the Climate Change Act 2008 (as amended) is set out in the Library
Briefing on UK Carbon Budgets and the Library Briefing on Legislating
for Net Zero.
The UK also contributes to international efforts by participating in EU
mechanisms such as the EU emissions trading system (EU ETS); and
meeting EU targets, for example under the “effort sharing” legislation.
The House of Lords Library briefing on Leaving the European Union: UK
Climate Change Policy (July 2017) provides further background on
climate change policies.
In December 2019 the European Commission published a
communication called The European Green Deal. 111 It is described as
resetting “the Commission’s commitment to tackling climate and
environmental-related challenges that is this generation’s defining
task.” 112 It presented an initial roadmap of the key policies and
measures needed to achieve a number of goals. The European
Commission presented a proposal for a European Climate Law on 4
March 2020, which included a net zero by 2050 target. 113 The European
Green Deal also includes proposals for a carbon border adjustment
mechanism, which would apply a price to the carbon content of goods
imported into the EU market. 114
During the transition period, the UK must continue applying and
implementing EU law that falls within the scope of the Withdrawal

Committee on Climate Change, Reducing UK emissions, 2019 Progress Report to
Parliament, 10 July 2019
111
European Commission website, A European Green Deal [accessed 26 February 2020]
112
European Commission, Communication from the Commission, The European Green
Deal, COM(2019) 640 final, 11 December 2019
113
European Commission proposal for a regulation: European Climate law, 4 March
2020; and Europa pages on European Climate Law [accessed 16 March 2020]
114
European Commission website, A European Green Deal [accessed 11 June 2020]
110

34 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Agreement. This includes remaining a full participant in the EU
emissions trading scheme (see below). 115

5.1 Negotiating positions of the EU and the
UK Government
The precise nature of the future relationship between the UK and EU on
climate change policies is unclear as negotiations are ongoing. Both the
EU and the UK Government have set out their general positions and
proposals on climate change at various points in the negotiation
process. Some of the key positions are summarised below. Further detail
on the latest negotiating positions is included with the relevant policy
sections of this chapter.

2017-18

The Clean Growth Strategy (October 2017) explained the Government’s
view of the potential impact of leaving the EU on climate change
policies, stating that domestic commitments would not be affected, but
that the exact nature of the UK’s future relationship with the EU,
including in areas such as the EU ETS were “still to be determined”:
Leaving the EU will not affect our statutory commitments under
our own domestic Climate Change Act and indeed our domestic
binding emissions reduction targets are more ambitious than
those set by EU legislation. The exact nature of the UK’s future
relationship with the EU and the long-term shape of our
involvement in areas like the EU Emissions Trading System are still
to be determined. There are also emerging opportunities to drive
more action – for example by putting emission reductions and
land stewardship at the heart of a post EU agricultural support
policy. We will therefore carefully examine each area of common
interest with our EU partners and work to deliver policies and
programmes that are at least as beneficial as the current
arrangements. 116

The European Council’s guidelines on the framework for future EU-UK
relations (23 March 2018) 117 included a new Article requiring continued
“close cooperation” in relation to global challenges, “in particular in the
areas of climate change and sustainable development, as well as crossborder pollution”. 118 This approach was reflected in the subsequently
agreed Political Declaration on the Framework for the Future
Relationship, as below.
The May Government’s White Paper on the Future Relationship
between the UK and the EU (12 July 2018) 119 committed to
“maintaining high standards on climate change” and continuing to

Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements from 1 January 2021, 28 April 2020
[accessed 3 June 2020]
116
Gov.uk, Clean Growth Strategy, 12 October 2017
117
European Council, Article 50 Guidelines, 23 March 2018
118
European Council, Article 50 Guidelines, 23 March 2018. See Library Briefing on
Brexit: new guidelines on the framework for future EU-UK relations (19 April 2018)
for further discussion of the Council’s guidelines.
119
HM Government, The Future Relationship between the United Kingdom and the
European Union, 12 July 2018, Cm 9593
115

35 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

meet the UK’s international obligations in this area. 120 The May
Government’s November 2018 Withdrawal Agreement did not include
any explicit climate change provisions, with the exception of within the
‘backstop’ in the Ireland / Northern Ireland Protocol which committed
the UK to maintaining a level playing field with the EU in relation to
environmental protection, including climate change, should the
‘backstop’ come into force. This was superseded by the 2019
Withdrawal Agreement and was not ratified.

2019
In a May 2019 consultation document on the Future of UK Carbon
Pricing, the UK Government and devolved Administrations stated that
(rather than remaining in the EU ETS) securing a linking agreement with
the EU for a linked UK ETS was their preferred option. Alternative
carbon pricing options were also consulted on to address a scenario
where a linking agreement cannot be secured with the EU. 121 The
consultation closed on 12 July 2019 and the Government published its
response on 1 June 2020. 122 It confirmed that the Government would
establish a UK ETS and was open to it being linked to the EU ETS.
On 19 August 2019, Prime Minister Johnson wrote to the President of
the European Council (Donald Tusk) stating that:
Although we will remain committed to world-class environmental,
product and labour standards, the laws and regulations to deliver
them will potentially diverge from those of the EU. That is the
point of our exit and our ability to enable this is central to our
future democracy. 123

2020
The ratified Withdrawal Agreement came into force on 1 February
2020. It does not contain any specific provisions or exceptions on
climate change. The Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland contained
within the Withdrawal Agreement does not contain the level playing
field provisions (including in relation to climate change) of the May
Government’s Withdrawal Agreement. Article 9 of the Protocol the
continues the operation of the Single Electricity Market in Northern
Ireland from the end of the transition period, which includes Northern
Ireland remaining in the EU emissions trading scheme (see more in
section 4.2 above).
The Political Declaration commits the parties to global cooperation on
climate change and reaffirming commitments to international
agreements such as the Paris Agreement. It also includes commitments
from both parties to ensure a ‘level playing field’ in the future
relationship with regard to a number of different matters including
climate change. 124 This remains the same as the May Government’s
Political Declaration. More information on the Ireland/Northern Ireland
HM Government, The Future Relationship between the United Kingdom and the
European Union, 12 July 2018, Cm 9593, Paras 107 and 108, 119 and 120
121
Gov.uk, Consultation on the Future of UK Carbon Pricing, 2 May 2019
122
Gov.uk, Consultation outcome, The future of UK carbon pricing, 1 June 2020
[accessed 3 June 2020]
123
Gov.uk, PM letter to His Excellency Mr Donald Tusk, 19 August 2019
124
HM Government, New Political Declaration, 19 October 2019, Articles 13 and 14
120

36 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Protocol is available in the Library Briefing Paper on the October 2019
EU UK Withdrawal Agreement and the Library Insight on Brexit and the
Northern Ireland Border.
The Prime Minister’s written statement on 3 February 2020 stated that
the Government would not agree to measures in climate change policy
and other level playing field areas going “beyond those typically
included in a comprehensive free trade agreement”. The statement set
out the Government’s belief that the two parties should recognise their
respective commitments to maintaining high standards, agreeing to
avoid using trade distorting measures and “confirm that they will
uphold their international obligations”. 125
The EU’s negotiating directives were adopted on 25 February 2020. 126
The envisaged partnership included the “fight against climate change”
as a key objective, specifically mentioning that the Paris Agreement
should constitute an essential element. In section 15 on level playing
field and sustainability, climate change is included as an area in which
the envisaged partnership should “uphold common high standards, and
corresponding high standards over time with Union standards as a
reference point”. 127 More information on the level playing field is
available in the Library Briefing Paper on the UK-EU future relationship
negotiations: level playing field
The UK Government’s policy paper: the future relationship with the EU,
the UK’s approach to negotiations (27 February 2020) 128 did not include
climate change within the proposals for a comprehensive free trade
agreement. Instead, climate change and carbon trading were included
under a proposed Agreement on Energy (the text of which was
published by the Government later in May 2020). It stated that “the UK
is open to considering an agreement on energy if it reflects its interests
and as long as it respects the fact that the UK will make independent
decisions on its energy policies”.
The European Commission published a draft treaty text on 18 March
2020. 129 In line with the negotiating directives, the EU included the fight
against climate change as an “essential element” of the partnership as
well as within the level playing field provisions.
The UK Government published the ten draft treaty texts it had tabled in
the negotiations on 19 May 2020. In line with its approach to date, it
included climate change within its draft energy agreement text, rather
than in its draft comprehensive free trade agreement. The draft energy
agreement includes draft provisions on “the fight against climate
change” in line with the Government’s command paper and a
placeholder on carbon pricing rather than detailed legal provisions
HCWS86 [on UK / EU relations] 3 February 2020
Council of the EU, ANNEX to COUNCIL DECISION authorising the opening of
negotiations with the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland for a
new partnership agreement, 25 February 2020
127
EU negotiating directives, para 94
128
HM Government, The future relationship with the EU, the UK’s approach to
negotiations, 27 February 2020, CP211
129
European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, 18 March 2020
125
126

37 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

(noting that it will be subject to further discussions). The energy
agreement has separate governance arrangements to the trade
agreement (see section 3.4 above).
The UK’s chief negotiator, David Frost, wrote to Michel Barnier on 19
May 2020 stating that the UK is committed to high standards but could
not accept the EU’s level playing field proposals:
We have been clear that the UK will have high standards and, in
many cases, higher standards than those in the EU. However, we
cannot accept any alignment with EU rules, the appearance of EU
law concepts, or commitments around internal monitoring and
enforcement that are inappropriate for an FTA. 130

Reports from the fourth round of negotiations in June 2020 was that no
significant progress was made in reaching an agreement. 131

Further information
For more information on the UK and EU’s negotiating positions, see:
•

Library Briefing paper on The UK-EU future relationship: summary
of positions

•

Library Briefing paper on The UK-EU future relationship: the
March 2020 EU draft treaty and negotiations update, 27 May
2020

•

Library Briefing paper on The UK-EU future relationship: Level
playing field

Some key areas of climate change policy subject to ongoing
negotiations between the UK and EU are discussed below.

5.2 International framework
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) was adopted during the 1992 Earth Summit, held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. It entered into force in 1994 and has been ratified by
196 States (including both the EU and the UK) which constitute the
“Parties” to the Convention. The objective of the Treaty, set out in
article 2 of the Convention, is to “stabilize greenhouse gas
concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent
dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.” Every
year a Conference of the Parties takes place (known as COPs).
The UK will host COP26 in November 2021 and Italy will host the preCOP events. COP26 was postponed from 2020 due to the Covid-19
pandemic. For more information see the Library Briefing Paper on
COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK.

The Kyoto Protocol
The Kyoto Protocol was adopted at COP3 in Kyoto in 1997 and entered
into force in February 2005, with two commitment periods (2008-2012
and 2013-2020). Its main goal is to reduce certain greenhouse gas

130
131

Gov.uk Letter to Michel Barnier, 19 May 2020
Politico, No significant progress in Brexit talks, 6 May 2020 [accessed 16 June 2020]

38 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

emissions 132 and parties to the Protocol (including the UK) must meet
their targets primarily through national measures. An additional means
by which Parties can meet their targets is through the market-based
mechanisms established by the Protocol: the clean development
mechanism; joint implementation; and emissions trading. The UK’s
national Kyoto Protocol Registry is located within the Consolidated
System of European Registries and facilitates the trading of Kyoto
Protocol emissions units. 133
Under the Kyoto Protocol, EU countries (and Iceland) have agreed a joint
commitment to meet a 20% reduction target compared to 1990 levels.
This is in line with the EU’s own 2020 targets. 134 EU countries meet
these targets through the EU ETS and, for sectors not in the EU ETS,
through the “effort sharing decision” which sets binding annual
national emission reduction targets. 135
The UK is a party to the UNFCCC and has ratified the Kyoto Protocol
separately to the EU. The Government has confirmed it remains
committed to meeting its international climate change obligations. 136
Subject to any extension, the end of the transition period (31 December
2020) will align with the end of the second commitment period under
the Kyoto Protocol. The Withdrawal Agreement ensures that certain
reporting obligations relating to 2019 and 2020 continue to apply to
the UK until the end of the second commitment period of the Kyoto
Period (2013-20). 137 During the transition period, UK businesses
continue to have access to the Kyoto Protocol National Registry within
the UK section of the Consolidated System of European Registries, and
can continue to access their accounts.

The Paris Agreement
In December 2015, agreement was reached at COP21 in Paris to keep a
global temperature rise this century well below 2°C above pre-industrial
levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even
further to 1.5°C. 138 Both the EU and the UK are signatories to the Paris
Agreement.
The Paris Agreement requires each Party to prepare, communicate and
maintain successive (every 5 years) nationally determined contributions
(NDCs) of the emissions reductions that it intends to achieve. NDCs
were first submitted by Parties in 2015. Parties are expected to put
forward enhanced or updated NDCs in 2020. The EU currently has an

Six greenhouse gases for the first commitment period; seven greenhouse gases for
the second commitment period.
133
More information on the mechanisms is available on the UNFCCC pages:
Mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol.
134
European Commission, Climate Action, Kyoto 2nd commitment period (2013-2020)
[accessed 8 November 2018]
135
See: European Commission, Climate Action, Effort sharing: Member States’
emissions targets [accessed 8 November 2018]
136
See: Gov.uk Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, updated
12 April 2019 [accessed 26 July 2019]
137
Article 96
138
UNFCCC, The Paris Agreement [accessed 3 August 2017]
132

39 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

overall NDC on behalf of its Member States (including the UK), acting
jointly.
COP25 was held in Madrid, Spain with a key aim to finalise the “Paris
rulebook” in order to ensure full implementation from 2020. However,
the talks did not reach the consensus hoped for with some of the more
technical elements pushed out to COP26 in the UK.
Further information is available in the Library Briefing Paper on Chile
Madrid Climate change conference: COP25; and the Library Briefing
Paper on COP26: the international climate change conference,
Glasgow, UK.
Background information is available in the House of Commons Library
Briefing Papers on the Paris Climate Change Conference (27 September
2016) and the Paris Agreement and Marrakech Climate Conference (25
November 2017).

The future relationship
The UK is a party to the UNFCCC and has ratified the Paris Agreement
separately from the EU. 139 The Government has confirmed it remains
committed to the Paris Agreement and that it will continue to be bound
by the Paris Agreement as an individual party under international law.
The Government guidance states:
The UK will also remain a Party to international climate change
agreements, including the Paris Agreement. Its commitment to
them will remain as strong as ever and will be unaffected by
leaving the EU. 140

The UK has confirmed it will submit “its own increased NDC” in
advance of COP26:
Following our departure from the EU, the UK will be bringing
forward its own, increased NDC well ahead of COP26. The UK
NDC will be built on the foundations of well-established UK
analysis and policy development for domestic climate change
mitigation, used to set the UK’s fifth carbon budget (2028-32)
and described in the Clean Growth Strategy. In its Net Zero
advice, the Committee on Climate Change was clear that the
Clean Growth Strategy continues to offer the right framework for
the ambitious action needed to deliver net zero. 141

The EU has been silent on the possibility of formally requesting the UK
to continue to participate in joint fulfilment of a new NDC. It has said:
In 2020, the EU will update its NDC as agreed in Paris, taking into
account the need to increase clarity, transparency and
understanding of its NDC. 142

An independent climate change think tank, E3G, published a report on
Climate change in the Brexit negotiations (May 2020) which explains
the impact of the UK leaving the EU on the EU’s NDC ambitions:
Gov.uk news story, UK ratifies the Paris Agreement, 18 November 2016 [accessed
30 August 2018]
140
Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements from 1 January 2021, 28 April 2020
[accessed 3 June 2020]
141
PQ 12820 [on climate change] 14 February 2020
142
Council of the EU, Preparations for UNFCCC meetings, 4 October 2019
139

40 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

The withdrawal of the UK from the EU effort sharing regulation
makes increasing EU ambition more difficult. The UK, like other
larger and richer countries, took on a more ambitious share of the
EU target than the EU average. Privately several EU Member States
and Parliamentarians have expressed concern that the UK’s
absence may limit the ability to agree an ambitious new target,
especially the 55% reduction at the top end of the considered
range. 143

Negotiating positions
The latest negotiating positions from each party in relation to
international climate change obligations and the Paris Agreement, and
their interaction with domestic law and policy, are set out below.
UK position

EU position

Within its draft Energy Agreement
(published May 2020), the UK
proposals include that:
•
the Parties each affirm their
commitment to effectively
implement the Paris
Agreement;
•
each Party retains the right to
establish its own climate
change priorities and to adopt
or modify its laws and policies
accordingly
•
each Party shall seek to ensure
[…] high levels of climate
protection, and shall strive to
continue to improve such laws
and policies

The EU draft treaty text (March
2020) proposals include as ”essential
elements” to the agreement, that:
•
each Party shall respect the
Paris Agreement and the
process set by UNFCCC, and
refrain from any acts or
omissions that would
undermine its adherence to or
materially defeat the object
and purpose of the Paris
Agreement
•
the Parties shall advocate the
fight against climate change
in international fora, including
by engaging with other
countries and regions to
increase their level of ambition
in the reduction of
greenhouse emissions
Within the Level Playing Field
Provisions, the EU includes:
•
each Party shall effectively
implement the UNFCCC and
the Paris Agreement.

Commentary
In September 2018, businesses and industry bodies called on the then
UK Prime Minister and President of the European Commission to agree
to cooperate on implementing the Paris Agreement as one of several
negotiating priorities on energy and climate change set out in an open
letter. 144 A report from E3G (a climate change think tank) on Brexit and

Climate cooperation, Implications for the Paris Agreement and net zero
E3G Briefing Paper, Climate change in the Brexit negotiations, Shane Tomlinson, May
2020 [accessed 16 June 2020]
144
Open letter to Jean-Claude Juncker and Theresa May, Prioritising EU27 / UK
cooperation on climate change and energy, 4 September 2018, signed by British
Irish Chamber of Commerce, EDF, Electricity Association of Ireland, Energy UK, Earth
Capital Partners, Renewable UK, Unilever, WHEB, WindEurope, Loftbergs [accessed
5 September 2018]
143

41 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

(October 2018) made a number of recommendations, including that the
EU and the UK should agree a broad scope for climate cooperation and
that a decision by the UK to set out an independent NDC would still be
compatible with high levels of climate cooperation with the EU (see
more below). 145
On 6 May 2020, the Financial Times reported that the EU desire to
include commitment to the Paris Agreement among the essential
elements of the future partnership was a source of disagreement with
the UK in the negotiations. 146 The EU indicated that it wants such a
commitment in all its future trade deals. A Government spokesperson
said the UK was “absolutely committed to tackling climate change” but
that it was opposed to embedding legally binding pledges into any deal
with the EU:
“The agreements we reach with the EU should reaffirm both
parties’ commitments to the Paris agreement and recognise both
sides’ right to decide their own regulation to meet our respective
climate goals,” the spokesperson said. “This does not require an
additional binding international legal commitment.” 147

In June 2020, a group of EU and UK energy trade bodies welcomed the
commitments of both parties to international and domestic climate
change goals:
We welcome that both negotiating Parties remain fully committed
to the goals of the Paris Agreement and to their own domestic
legislations and climate targets. We are confident that considering
the commitments in law and from governments, reaching zero
emissions by 2050 remains the priority. 148

A blog by an environmental law lecturer at Sussex University argued
that the EU’s proposal “poses virtually no threat unless the UK
withdraws altogether from the Paris Agreement”
Another potential area of concern is that the EU has listed
upholding the Paris Agreement as an essential element of the
Agreement (Article 5 of the ‘Common Provisions’ in the EU draft
FTA), meaning that it could suspend the Agreement for noncompliance. This is not specific to the UK, and poses virtually no
threat unless the UK withdraws altogether from the Paris
Agreement, particularly considering that it allows countries to
determine their own contributions to mitigating climate change.
Indeed, as a climate leader, the UK might well advocate the
inclusion of such conditionalities in its own FTAs. 149

An E3G report on Climate change in the Brexit negotiations (May 2020)
identified the UK’s narrower approach to climate change (limiting it to
references within the Energy Agreement) versus the EU’s wider
E3G, Brexit and Climate cooperation, Implications for the Paris Agreement and net
zero, 2 October 2019 [accessed 1 November 2018]
146
Financial Times, Brussels and Britain clash over climate conditions in trade deal, Jim
Brunsden, 6 May 2020 [accessed 16 June 2020] [subscription needed]
147
Financial Times, Brussels and Britain clash over climate conditions in trade deal, Jim
Brunsden, 6 May 2020 [accessed 16 June 2020] [subscription needed]
148
Energy UK, EU and UK trade bodies call for an efficient future energy EU-UK
relationship, 3 June 2020 [accessed 12 June 2020]
149
UK Trade Policy Observatory, Environment and climate change in the EU-UK
negotiations: Arguing the toss over nothing, blog by Dr Emily Lydgate [accessed 16
June 2020]
145

42 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

approach in its main trade agreement. E3G argue that the UK should
broaden its approach:
The UK negotiating position on climate also needs revision. The
current texts limit climate change and references to the Paris
Agreement within the proposed energy agreement. This ignores
the role of climate within transport, industry, agriculture and the
environment. The UK should revise its position to include a climate
change chapter and direct reference to the Paris Agreement in its
main free trade agreement proposal as well as the separate
energy agreement. 150

5.3 Carbon pricing
There are two main types of carbon pricing: carbon taxes and emissions
trading systems. 151

The UK’s participation in the EU ETS
One of the main carbon pricing mechanisms in the UK is the EU
emissions trading system (EU ETS). The UK also has a carbon price floor
to support the EU ETS price (see Box 4). The UK remains a full
participant in the EU ETS during the transition period.
The EU ETS is described as the “largest multi-country, multi-sector
greenhouse gas emissions trading system in the world” covering more
than 11,000 power stations and industrial plants across the EU with
around 1,000 of these in the UK. 152 153
The mandatory cap-and-trade scheme was launched in 2005 and has
since undergone a number of reforms. It is central to the EU’s climate
change target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 40% by 2030
compared to 1990 levels.
The EU ETS sets an EU-wide cap on the total amount of greenhouse gas
emissions from energy intensive sectors including power stations and
industrial plants. The cap decreases over time (1.74% each year) to
reduce overall emissions. 154 Airlines operating between the 31 countries
are covered within the EU ETS but via a separate cap. Approximately
140 UK-administered aircraft operators take part in the EU ETS. 155
Companies either receive allowances (EU Allowances or EUAs) free or
purchase them during auctions of allowances issued by Governments. 156
Surplus allowances can also be traded on the carbon market. The
number of allowances held by the company at the end of an EU ETS
E3G Briefing Paper, Climate change in the Brexit negotiations, Shane Tomlinson,
May 2020 [accessed 16 June 2020]
151
\More information is available on The World Bank, Pricing Carbon [accessed 16 June
2020]
152
BEIS, Participating in the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), 31 July 2017
153
The greenhouse gases covered by EU ETS are carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide
(N2O) and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
154
European Commission, Climate Action, ‘Emissions cap and allowances’, [accessed:
20 February 2018]
155
Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, 12 October
2018
156
Each allowance gives the holder the right to emit one tonne of carbon dioxide or the
equivalent of nitrous oxide and perfluorocarbons. (EU Commission, Climate Action,
‘Emissions cap and allowances’, accessed 20 October 2016
150

43 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

year must be equal to, or more than, the total volume of emissions from
its installation. Compliance is assessed and verified by an independent
third party, and the company must surrender its allowances for the
preceding calendar year by no later than 30 April the following year.
The EU ETS is currently in Phase III (2013-2020), which aims for an
overall emissions reduction of 21% compared to 2005 emissions for
power stations and industrial plants.
In Phase III, power stations purchase all their allowances whereas other
industries still receive some of their EUAs via free allocation. Both
sectors can also buy international credits from emission-saving projects
around the world. 157 At the end of each year, if a company does not
have enough EUAs to cover all its emissions it is required to pay a
fine. 158
The market price of EUAs fell dramatically after the financial crisis in
2008 and stayed low for several years. From late 2011 until 2017, EUAs
cost less than €10 per tonne 159 although in 2018 the price started to
rise and reached over €28 in 2019. 160 In the earlier years, several
Member States and various EU ETS stakeholders considered the EU
carbon price to be too low to create a strong enough incentive for
polluters to undertake the required investment in low-carbon
technologies and to drive low-carbon innovation.
As a result of the low prices, the EU introduced several measures to
reduce the supply of allowances going forward, including removing
surplus allowances from the market. The UK also responded to the issue
of the low cost of carbon in 2013 by introducing the Carbon Price Floor
(CPF), a UK-only carbon tax which supplements the price of carbon
through the EU ETS (see Box 2). Since it was introduced, the CPF has
increased the price of carbon for UK customers and helped to drive coal
almost completely out of the UK energy mix. 161 There is no EU-wide
floor price for EUA auctions.
Box 4: Carbon price floor
The Carbon Price Floor (CPF) is a UK Government policy implemented to support the EU ETS. The CPF
taxes fossil fuels used to generate electricity via Carbon Price Support rates. The price floor consists of
two components which are paid for by energy generators in two different ways: (i) the EU ETS
allowance price; and (ii) the Carbon Price Support (CPS), which tops up the EU Allowance prices, as
projected by the Government, to the carbon price floor target.
The Treasury confirms the target carbon price and CPS rates three years in advance of delivery at each
Budget, and all revenue from the CPF is retained by the Treasury.
When the CPF was introduced, it was due to rise every year until 2020 (to a price of £30/tCO2). At
Budget 2014 the Government announced that the CPS component of the floor price would be capped

European Commission, Climate Action, ‘Free allocation’, [accessed: 20 February
2018]
158
European Commission, Climate Action, ‘The EU Trading System (EU ETS)’, [accessed:
20 February 2018]
159
CarbonBrief, Q&A will the reformed EU ETS raise carbon prices? 6 December 2017
[accessed 3 September 2018]
160
EUAs were at EUR 21.06 on 31 August 2018 and EUR 28.99 on 26 July 2019
according to ICE EUA futures via Sandbag and Quandl.
161
BEIS, Coal Generation In Great Britain The pathway to a low-carbon future:
consultation document, November 2016
157

44 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

at a maximum of £18/tCO2 from 2016 to 2020 to limit the competitive disadvantage faced by business
and reduce energy bills for consumers. This price freeze was extended to 2021 in Budget 2016. Budget
2018 stated that from 2021-22 the Government will seek to reduce the CPS if the total carbon price
remains high.
Background information on the carbon price floor is available in the House of Commons Library
briefing: Carbon Price Floor (CPF) and the price support mechanism (8 January 2018),

The future relationship
The UK will leave the EU ETS at the end of the transition period.
Northern Ireland operators will remain in the EU ETS by virtue of the
Ireland/Northern Ireland Protocol in the Withdrawal Agreement in
relation to the continued operation of the Single Electricity Market in
Ireland (see more in section 4 above). 162
The May Government committed in its Clean Growth Strategy (October
2017) to carbon pricing as a means of driving decarbonisation. 163 This
has been reiterated by the current Government and the devolved
Administrations throughout the negotiation process:
The UK government and the devolved administrations are firmly
committed to carbon pricing as an effective tool for achieving our
carbon emissions reductions targets for net zero. 164

However, until June 2020, the type of carbon pricing the Government
planned to implement at the end of the transition period was not
known. Whether or not the UK’s future carbon pricing will be linked to
the EU emissions trading system (EU ETS) remains subject to
negotiations and is not yet known. The UK Government has said it
“would be open to considering a link between a UK ETS and the EU
ETS, if it suits both sides’ interests”. 165
In May 2019, the UK Government and the devolved Administrations
launched a 12-week joint consultation on the “future of UK carbon
pricing” (12 May-12 July 2019), which sought views on the approach to
UK carbon pricing following Brexit. 166 The consultation set out a number
of carbon pricing options. It identified the establishment of a UK
national emissions trading system (UK ETS) linked to the EU ETS
following the end of Phase III as the preferred option of the UK
Government and the devolved Administrations. This approach is not
without precedent. Although Switzerland is not a participant in the EU
ETS, in November 2017 it signed an agreement (subject to ratification)
to link its emissions trading system with the EU ETS.167 The agreement
entered into force on 1 January 2020. Linking a UK ETS with the EU
Article 9 and Annex 4 of the Ireland / Northern Ireland Protocol help to maintain the
continued operation of the Single Electricity Market by providing for Northern
Ireland power generators to continue to participate in the EU ETS after the transition
Period.
163
HM Government, Clean Growth Strategy, October 2017, p. 45
164
Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements from 1 January 2021, 28 April 2020
[accessed 3 June 2020]
165
Gov.uk, Consultation outcome, The future of carbon pricing, 1 June 2020
166
Gov.uk consultation, The future of UK carbon pricing, 21 May 2019
167
EU, EU and Switzerland sign agreement to link emissions trading systems, 23
November 2017
162

45 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

ETS would require agreement between both parties and be subject to
negotiation. Overall the process to link the Swiss ETS to the EU ETS took
10 years. 168
If the UK remained part of, or linked to, the EU ETS, the EU would
continue to be responsible for developing and enforcing the rules. The
Swiss Government will cede some regulatory control to Brussels as part
of linking its ETS market to that of the EU ETS. Subject to the outcome
of negotiations, the UK Government may therefore have limited ability
to bring about any major reforms of the EU ETS. However, in March
2018 evidence to a House of Lords Committee, the then BEIS Minister
noted that the UK has been part of the current negotiations for Phase 4
(up to 2030) and much of the final detail will happen during the period
when the UK is still an active participant, thus giving some clarity up to
2030. 169
The 2019 consultation provided the following explanation on linking
agreements:
Any linking agreement requires a UK ETS to which the EU ETS
could link. It is therefore necessary to develop a UK ETS in the first
instance. When two ETSs are linked, each system recognises the
allowances of the other. This has the effect of creating a single
carbon price across both systems. Linking carbon markets can lead
to more efficient emissions reduction, since allowances are
tradable across a larger pool of participants. This results in a larger
number of cost-effective abatement opportunities, as well as
greater market liquidity for trading purposes, ensuring lower
transactional costs and minimising the risk of market abuse. As
well as increasing the efficiency of the system, a link between a
UK ETS and the EU ETS would ensure a smooth transition for the
relevant sectors. Given that a linking agreement would be subject
to negotiation, it is not possible to outline the precise details of
such an agreement at this stage. 170

The UK’s proposed scope of a UK ETS is that it matches the scope of the
EU ETS both in respect of sectors and greenhouse gases covered. The
consultation also sought views on the potential to expand scope in later
years of UK ETS operation.
The UK Government and the devolved Administrations also wrote to the
Government’s independent advisers, the Committee on Climate Change
(CCC), on 2 May 2019 to request advice on a UK emissions trading
scheme applying to the power, industry and aviation sectors, which
would either be a standalone UK ETS or a UK ETS linked to the EU
ETS. 171 In response, the CCC supported the Government’s preference
for a linked UK-EU ETS, although it noted that carbon pricing alone will
not provide sufficient decarbonisation and needs to be used as part of a
suite of policy instruments. The Committee also recommended that the

Council of the EU press release, Linking of Switzerland to the EU emissions trading
system - entry into force on 1 January 2020, 9 December 2019 [accesse
169
House of Lords Select Committee on the European Union, Oral evidence: Minister of
State for Energy and Clean Growth, 21 March 2018, Q8
170
Gov.uk consultation, The future of UK carbon pricing, 21 May 2019, p. 16
171
Gov.uk, letter to CCC on UK ETS, 2 May 2019
168

46 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

cap of the linked UK ETS be set based on the cost-effective path to the
UK’s new net zero target. 172
The House of Lords EU Energy and Environment Sub-Committee
concluded an inquiry on Post-Brexit carbon pricing which examined the
options of a UK ETS linked to the EU ETS and a carbon emissions tax. It
did not publish a report but wrote a number of letters to ministers on
this topic.
A UK ETS
The UK Government and devolved Administrations published the
response to the carbon pricing consultation on 1 June 2020. 173 It set out
plans for a new UK emissions trading scheme to replace the EU ETS,
which was designed by the UK Government jointly with the Scottish
Government, Welsh Government and Northern Ireland Executive. Key
elements of the UK ETS include:
•

Phase I of the new UK ETS would run from 2021 to 2030

•

the UK ETS could operate as a linked or standalone system

•

the UK ETS will apply to energy intensive industries, power
generators and aviation.

•

A proportion of allowances will be allocated for free; auctioning
will continue to be the primary means of getting allowances. The
auction reserve price will be £15 (nominal), with a mechanism in
place to address any high price spikes or adjustments needed.

•

The cap will initially be set 5% below the UK’s notional share of
the EU ETS cap for Phase IV of the EU ETS. This will be reviewed
following the CCC’s advice on the sixth carbon budget and net
zero later in 2020. The Government’s aim is that any changes
needed as a result of this will be implemented by 2023 if possible
and by no later than January 2024.

The UK Government will also publish a consultation in late 2020 on the
design of a carbon emissions tax as an alternative to a UK ETS “to
ensure a carbon price remains in place in all scenarios”.
Negotiating positions
The latest negotiating positions from each party in relation to carbon
pricing are set out below.
UK position

EU position

The UK draft energy agreement
(published in May 2020) includes a
placeholder on carbon pricing rather
than proposed legal drafting.
It states that the UK is open to
linking any UK ETS with the EU ETS if
it suited both sides’ interests but that
it would need to recognise both

The EU draft treaty (March 2020)
includes carbon pricing within the
Level Playing Field Provisions:
•
The UK shall implement a
system of carbon pricing of at
least the same scope and
effectiveness as that provided
by the EU ETS.

172
173

CCC, letter to the Rt Hon Kwasi Kwarteng MP, BEIS, 7 August 2019
Gov.uk, Consultation outcome, The future of carbon pricing, 1 June 2020

47 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

parties as sovereign equals with their
own domestic laws.

•

Should the UK create its own
emissions trading system and
request it to be linked to the
EU ETS, the Union shall give
serious consideration to such
request, provided that it does
not risk affecting the integrity
of the EU ETS, in particular its
balance of rights and
obligations, and that an
increase in scope and
effectiveness is ensured.

Commentary
The Committee on Climate Change wrote to the Government in March
2020 in response to a formal request from the UK Government, Scottish
Government, Welsh Government and Northern Ireland Assembly
regarding the future of carbon pricing in UK, specifically in relation to
the successor to the EU Emissions Trading Systems (ETS) after EU exit.
The Committee made a number of recommendations including that
leaving the EU provides the UK with an opportunity to match the
ambition of its own approach to an emissions trading scheme to the
UK’s own circumstances, in particular its net zero target:
Leaving the EU presents an opportunity for the UK to align the
ambition of its trading scheme to the UK’s own circumstances.
Ultimately, that requires a tightening of the cap of the scheme in
line with a trajectory consistent with the UK’s Net Zero target for
2050. 174

The Committee went onto say that:
We also note a change in language over linking to the EU ETS […]
It is now described as an option at a later date, and if desired. The
Committee remains of the view that a UK ETS should link to the
EU ETS as soon as is practicable. 175

The industry trade body, Energy UK’s interim chief executive welcomed
the Government’s approach:
We strongly support Government establishing a UK ETS linked to
the EU ETS and back its efforts to agree this approach with the
EU. This is the best long-term carbon pricing mechanism to
continue driving decarbonisation at the lowest cost to consumers,
which will allow us to benefit from the liquidity of the world’s
largest carbon market and help us meet our net zero target by
2050.
In the event that a linking agreement cannot be secured in time
for 1 January 2021, we welcome Government’s decision to
introduce stability measures such as an Auction Reserve Price
(ARP) to protect a newly-established stand-alone UK ETS from
market shocks and volatility due to its smaller size. It is positive to
have clarity on the level of the ARP (£15), however, we urgently
need clarity from the Treasury of the level of the Carbon Emission
CCC letter, The future of carbon pricing to The Rt Hon Kwasi Kwarteng MP, dated
March 2020, published 1 June 2020
175
CCC letter, The future of carbon pricing to The Rt Hon Kwasi Kwarteng MP,
published 1 June 2020
174

48 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Tax (CET) or at least the methodology in July. This will ensure that
power operators have full visibility of the total carbon price,
whether via a standalone UK ETS or CET fallback, in January
2021. 176

The E3G report on Climate change in the Brexit negotiations (May
2020) noted that although both the UK and EU seem to have significant
alignment in their approach, linking trading systems can take years of
negotiation:
However, although many of the high-level objectives have
significant alignment the pathway to achieving this is far from
automatic. The experience of linking the Swiss emissions trading
system to the EU-ETS required years of negotiation to work
through all the detail. It is therefore vital that substantive
negotiations on these issues begin as soon as possible. 177

176
177

Energy UK, Energy UK responds to UK Government's ETS proposal, 2 June 2020
E3G Briefing Paper, Climate change in the Brexit negotiations, Shane Tomlinson,
May 2020 [accessed 16 June 2020]

49 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

6. Annex: Previous material on
preparations for a possible “no
deal” scenario (2017-January
2020)
Before the UK left the EU on 31 January 2020, both parties put in place
contingency plans in case of a “no deal” scenario where a withdrawal
agreement was not agreed. Although no longer required, the following
sections set out the plans that were made for this purpose for
background information. This text therefore refers in part to issues
resolved by the Withdrawal Agreement or subsequent policy
developments.

6.1 Civil Nuclear
As discussed in more detail above, the UK prepared for leaving Euratom,
by passing the Nuclear Safeguards Act 2018 and negotiating
replacement Nuclear Cooperation Agreements for trade. This
preparation meant a no deal Brexit would not have had a disruptive
impact on those aspects of the UK’s civil nuclear industry.
For other functions of Euratom, such as supply arrangements, import
licences, and nuclear research, a no deal Brexit may have affected the
continuation of existing arrangements, and required management
through proposed changes in funding or practice:
•

Nuclear trade: Before the UK’s departure from the EU and
Euratom, the Government published a number of guidance
documents on trade of nuclear related materials after Brexit.
Import licences for certain nuclear materials from EU countries,
were not required before Brexit, but would have been required if
there was no deal, and some supply contracts for nuclear material
which involved a Euratom member may have needed to be reapproved. Shipping operators also needed to ensure they had
applied for the correct authorisations and used the correct
documentation when shipping radioactive waste and spent
fuel. 178

•

Radioisotopes: In preparation for the possibility of the UK
leaving the EU with no Brexit deal, the Government announced
plans to stockpile medicines, but as radio-isotopes have short halflives, they cannot be stockpiled. Due to concerns of possible
custom delays on road and rail routes, the May Government
asked suppliers “to ensure they have plans in place to air freight
[radioisotopes] to avoid any border delays that may arise”. 179

See also Gov.uk, Civil nuclear regulation if there’s no Brexit deal, guidance
withdrawn on 12 August 2019
179
PQ 176162, [on Radioisotopes], 11 October 2018
178

50 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Some stakeholders questioned whether the air freight plans
would be an efficient replacement for current arrangements. 180 In
June 2019, the Department of Health and Social Care announced
it would tender to secure an “express freight service” to provide
“end-to-end” transport for medicines including radioisotopes in
the case of no deal. 181 An article in the Pharmaceutical Journal
quotes Layla McCay, director of international relations at the NHS
confederation as saying the new express freight plans where
[medicines are] tracked all the way” would be “more reliable”. 182
In a letter to Prime Minister Johnson on 1 August 2019, three
groups who procure and use radioisotopes (the Royal College of
Radiologists, the British Nuclear Medicine Society, and the UK
Radiopharmacy Group) said they were “encouraged” by the work
being undertaken on radioisotopes, but continued that they
“remain[ed] apprehensive” about supplier readiness and the
impact of supply changes on patients. They asked the Prime
Minister for clarity on three issues: custom delays at airports, the
need for qualified drivers, and what action would be taken to
address the “increased costs caused by Brexit”. 183
•

Research: In the event of no-deal, the UK Government issued
guidance (now withdrawn) on nuclear research after Brexit, which
stated:
The UK will leave Euratom (the European Atomic Energy
Community) and will no longer be:
•

a member of the Euratom Research & Training (R&T)
programme

•

a member of Fusion for Energy

•

able to collaborate on the International Thermonuclear
Experimental Reactor (ITER) project through the EU 184

In relation to a no deal scenario, the Government’s Nuclear research
after Brexit guidance stated on ITER:
The UK will no longer be a member of Fusion for Energy and UK
businesses will not be able to bid for International Thermonuclear
Experimental Reactor (ITER) contracts through Fusion for Energy.
However, the UK government is exploring alternative options to
maintain UK participation in ITER. 185

6.2 Energy trading and the IEM
Before the UK’s departure from the EU, the Government published a
number of technical notices on how to prepare for Brexit if there was

Caroline Wickware, Plans for importing medical isotopes changed after government
review of no-deal Brexit proposals, The Pharmaceutical Journal, 13 August 2019
181
Department for Health and Social Care, New Service to deliver urgent medicines and
medical products in the UK, 15 August 2019
182
Caroline Wickware, Plans for importing medical isotopes changed after government
review of no-deal Brexit proposals, The Pharmaceutical Journal, 13 August 2019
183
Royal College of Radiologists, Prime Minister urged to clarify queries on radioisotope
transport and costs, 1 August 2019
184
Gov.uk, Nuclear research after Brexit, 13 August 2019
185
Gov.uk, Nuclear research after Brexit, 13 August 2019
180

51 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

no deal (since withdrawn). 186 The guidance on trading gas and electricity
stated the UK would leave the IEM in the event of no deal:
European energy law will no longer apply to the UK and the UK’s
electricity markets will be decoupled from the Internal Energy
Market. 187

The gas guidance also stated the EU law would no longer apply. The
implications for electricity trading were that new agreements would
need to be developed:
Cross-border flows across electricity interconnectors will no longer
be governed by EU legislation which provides for efficient trade
and cross-border cooperation in operating the electricity system.
Without these arrangements, alternative trading arrangements
will need to be developed. Regulators in the UK and EU will need
to ensure that new access rules, which set the terms and
conditions for this trade, are in place. 188

The guidance set out a number of actions that would need to be taken,
such as market participants registering with EU regulators, changes to
domestic industry codes and licences, and also stated that the
Government had published statutory instruments, to come into effect
on exit day in the event of no deal, to ensure energy laws continued to
work. Similar requirements were laid out in the gas trading guidance.

6.3 The island of Ireland
The SEM is based on a bilateral co-operation agreement between UK
and Irish Governments, rather than on EU legislation. If the UK were to
leave the IEM as a result of no deal, trading across the SEM was
expected to be able to continue. However due to the fact the island of
Ireland’s only physical connections with the IEM are through GB, trading
between the SEM and IEM was expected to be uncoupled. Decoupling
can lead to reduced efficiency as Box 1 explains, potentially leading to
more expensive imports and higher energy bills for customers across the
island of Ireland.
The SEM committee, the decision-making committee for the market,
published a technical note on 28 March 2019, explaining the
differences in trading in the event of no-deal:
This all-island trade will continue in the event of a ‘no deal’ Brexit.
Trade between the all-island market and Great Britain, through
the interconnectors, will continue although this trade may be less
efficient, as some platforms operated under EU rules may not be
used in the same way as today.
In the SEM, generators and suppliers can trade electricity in a
number of timeframes. Electricity can be traded the day before it
is expected to be used (known as the Single Day Ahead Coupling
- SDAC) and can be traded on the day itself (known as the
Intraday Markets). Currently the SDAC operates as part of a panEuropean market, with the SEM connected through Great Britain.
Electricity is traded across almost all the EU Member States
Gov.uk, UK government’s preparations for a no deal scenario, last updated 23
August 2018
187
Gov.uk, Trading electricity if there’s no Brexit deal, updated 25 March 2019
188
Gov.uk, Trading electricity if there’s no Brexit deal, updated 25 March 2019
186

52 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

simultaneously in this market. For the Intraday Market electricity is
traded at a regional level between SEM and Great Britain.
In the event of a ‘no deal’ Brexit, Great Britain will no longer be
part of the pan-EU Day Ahead Market which will impact on the
SEM’s ability to connect with the pan-EU market. In this situation,
the SEM will continue to operate as an isolated, all-island market
within the SDAC but with no connection between the SEM, GB
and the wider EU market. 189

However the Government’s no deal guidance on Electricity Trading
covered the issues for the SEM in the event of no deal, including the
possibility that “the SEM cannot be maintained”:
EU rules will cease to apply in Northern Ireland, leaving key
elements of the Single Electricity Market without any legal basis.
In the event of a no-deal, there will be implications for trade
between Great Britain and the Single Electricity Market through
interconnectors. […]
Given the benefits to consumers and the economy of the more
efficient, shared market, it is strongly in the interests of all parties
to agree to a means to avoid the split of the market. Recognising
this, the government will therefore take all possible measures to
maintain the Single Electricity Market. The government will
continue to work with the Irish Government and European
Commission to seek agreement that the Single Electricity Market
will continue.
However, if such an agreement cannot be reached, there is a risk
that the Single Electricity Market will be unable to continue, and
the Northern Ireland market would become separated from that
of Ireland. Separate Ireland and Northern Ireland markets will be
less efficient, with potential effects for producers and consumers
on both sides of the border.
If this situation arises, government, the Northern Ireland Utility
Regulator and SONI, the Northern Ireland Transmission System
Operator, will take action to mitigate the risks in Northern Ireland.
Contingency planning work is considering how best to transition
to new arrangements if the Single Electricity Market cannot be
maintained. 190

On 23 October 2018, during an evidence session for the House of Lords
Energy and Environment Sub Committee, the then Minister Claire Perry
MP and Jonathon Holyoak (Director for EU Energy and Climate Change
at BEIS) were asked about no deal planning for Northern Ireland:
Lord Rooker: Is your department responsible for making sure
that, in Northern Ireland, portable generators are available in case
things go wrong, or is it some other department? Are the
generators being manufactured in the UK?
Claire Perry: This is worst-case contingency planning.
Jonathan Holyoak: In almost all the bad-case scenarios, the
Utility Regulator in Northern Ireland will talk to the companies
about ensuring that capacity is available. With us on the GB side,
it will make sure that the interconnector between Scotland and

189
190

SEM Committee, Notice to Industry in the event of a ‘no deal’ Brexit, 28 March 2019
Gov.uk, Trading electricity if there’s no Brexit deal, 25 March 2019

53 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

Northern Ireland works efficiently to secure Northern Irish supply
as well.
Claire Perry: To reassure you, there are conversations on that and
other points, on an incredibly open-book basis, between my
department and the Northern Ireland Office. It is a shame that we
do not have a functioning Executive, but there are plenty of
people on the ground who are very keen to help us not get to
that scenario. 191

Both the Irish and UK Governments passed legislation in preparation for
no deal. The Irish Government’s Withdrawal of the United Kingdom
from the European Union (Consequential Provisions) Act 2019 was an
omnibus Act which included provisions to protect electricity trading. The
changes allow the Commission for Regulation of Utilities (CRU) to
quickly modify (on a temporary basis) licences of Irish-based SEM
participants in the event of no deal.
The UK Government, under the powers of the European Union
(Withdrawal) Act 2018, made several Statutory Instruments in order to
”remove inoperabilities” 192 relating to EU exit in relation to the SEM in a
no deal scenario.
However, the British Irish Chamber of Commerce and the trade body
Energy UK, who held roundtables on the UK-Ireland energy relationship,
warned that this legislation did not remove all risks for the SEM:
It was agreed that this legislation, although welcome, should not
be considered a panacea for the SEM in the event of a ‘No Deal’
Brexit. While the Irish Government does have some reserved
competences in Energy policy, the majority of energy and climate
legislation is derived from the EU under the auspices of the
Internal Energy Market (IEM). 193

6.4 Other energy
Guarantees of Origin
Guarantees of Origin (GOOs) are certificates used to track and account
for electricity generated by renewable energy sources or to identify the
origin of generated electricity from combined heat and power (CHP).
They are issued in Member States and recognised EU wide. 194
In the case of a no deal Brexit, UK guidance said the UK would continue
to accept EU GOOs, but that UK GOOs would no longer be valid in the
EU which may have impacted trading:
In a ‘no deal’ scenario, the government will ensure that Great
Britain will continue to recognise Guarantees of Origin issued in
Northern Ireland and EU countries. This will allow electricity
suppliers in Great Britain to continue to use EU and Northern
House of Lords Select Committee on the European Union, Energy and Environment
Sub-Committee, Uncorrected oral evidence: No deal preparations: energy and
environment, 23 October 2018, Q37
192
Gov.uk, The Electricity and Gas etc. (Amendent etc.) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019, 17
December 2018
193
British Irish Chamber of Commerce and Energy UK, Discussion Paper on ‘The impact
of Brexit on the Single Electricity Market (SEM) and the Future of the Internal Energy
Market (IEM) [accessed 5 September 2019]
194
The power to issue Guarantee of Origin certificates is devolved to Northern Ireland.
191

54 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

Ireland Guarantees of Origin to comply with their fuel mix
disclosure obligations and ensure that existing supply contracts
are not compromised, in so far as these contracts depend upon
Guarantee of Origin.
[…]
Guarantees of Origin from combined heat and power [and for
renewable energy] issued in Great Britain and Northern Ireland
will no longer be recognised in the EU. This will mean that existing
contracts with EU countries’ electricity suppliers or traders may be
compromised if the contract terms require the transfer of a
Guarantee of Origin recognised by the EU. 195

On 23 October 2018, during an evidence session for the House of Lords
Energy and Environment sub-committee, the then Minister for Energy
and Clean Growth Claire Perry said there was likely to be little impact
on CHP generators, but did not mention renewable generators:
To date, no UK-based CHP generators have applied for those EUissued CHP Guarantees of Origin, so we do not expect any
electricity trade to be affected under a ’no deal’ scenario. 196

Energy efficiency
Energy efficiency regulations limit the amount of energy that products
consume which can reduce costs for consumers and reduce energyrelated emissions. Before the referendum, there were press reports that
supported the case to leave the EU, as it would allow the UK to remove
EU energy efficiency laws on household items such as hoovers and
lightbulbs. 197
The Government’s domestic policy, before Brexit and at present, has
been to keep costs down for consumers, and also to meet emissions
targets (see sections below). The Government’s no deal guidance on
‘Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal’ stated
that these regulations would continue to be met:
For Ecodesign and energy labelling regulations which entered into
force and applied before 29 March 2019, regulatory alignment
was maintained by bringing relevant EU regulations into domestic
law.
Following the extension of Article 50 and the UK’s new departure
date of 31 October, further legislation is being prepared to ensure
any new EU laws that have come into force between 29 March
and 31 October continue to function in the UK after Brexit.
After the point of Brexit, the UK will keep step with equivalent
standards wherever possible and appropriate, or even exceed
them where it is in the UK’s interest to do so. 198

Gov.uk, Generating low-carbon electricity if there’s no Brexit deal, 24 September
2018
196
House of Lords Select Committee on the European Union, Energy and Environment
Sub-Committee, Uncorrected oral evidence: No deal preparations: energy and
environment, 23 October 2018, Q31
197
20 reasons you should vote to leave the European Union, The Telegraph, 22 June
2016
198
Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, 29 July 2019
195

55 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

6.5 Climate change
In preparation for a possible no deal scenario at the time, the then
Government published a technical notice on Meeting climate change
requirements if there’s no Brexit deal on 12 October 2018 199 which
focused on the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, the consolidated system
of European Registries (of emissions units), and the geological storage
of carbon dioxide. The European Commission also issued a number of
Notices to Stakeholders on climate action, including on the “Withdrawal
of the UK and the EU Emissions Trading System” and “Fluorinated
gases” on 19 December 2018. The Library Briefing on EU Preparations
for a no-deal Brexit (30 June 2019) provides further background.

Kyoto Protocol
In a no deal scenario, the European Commission stated that accounts
administered by the UK in the EU ETS Registry and the UK’s Kyoto
Protocol National Registry would have been inaccessible. With regard to
the Kyoto Protocol National Registry, the Government stated that its
“preferred solution” was to retain access to the Consolidated System of
European Registries but that this could not be guaranteed. The
Government said that it was exploring options including retaining access
to the existing Kyoto Protocol registry and the procurement of an
alternative registry system with a view to establishing a new system by
early 2021. It conceded that if access could not be retained in the event
of a no deal scenario, there was “likely to be a gap in service”. 200

Carbon pricing: EU ETS and a carbon tax
The Government’s guidance on meeting climate change requirements if
there’s no Brexit deal (now archived) stated that it was “discussing with
the Commission the implication of our exit from the EU on the EU ETS”.
In relation to the EU ETS, the Government confirmed that it would
remove requirements relating to the surrender of EUAs in a no deal
scenario, but that it intended to maintain the monitoring, reporting and
verification (MRV) arrangements. 201 In evidence to the House of Lords
EU Energy and Environment Sub-Committee, the then Energy Minister
referred to this outcome as “a mirror system linked to the ETS”. 202
To accomplish this, the Government laid the Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Trading Scheme (Amendment) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 on 25 January
2019 to maintain the MRV elements of the scheme in the UK, and to
amend the other elements of retained EU law to reflect the fact that the
UK would no longer be part of the EU ETS and to ensure that the
199

Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, 12 October
2018 [archived]

Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, updated 29
July 2019 [archived]
201
Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, 12 October
2018 [archived]
202
House of Lords Select Committee on the European Union, Energy and Environment
Sub-Committee, Uncorrected oral evidence: No deal preparations: energy and
environment, 23 October 2018, Q25
200

56 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

retained law operated effectively in a domestic no deal scenario. Further
Regulations were laid in April 2019 to update and amend the MRV
elements to reflect changes in EU law. 203 Further information is available
in the accompanying explanatory memorandum.
A no deal scenario would have had practical consequences for the
overall EU ETS market and both EU and UK participants as the UK would
have left the EU ETS part way through a trading phase (Phase 3).
Participants who were UK operators of installations would have no
longer been part of the EU ETS and flights within the UK and between
the UK and the EU would not have been covered by the scheme. There
would have been no requirement for UK operators to surrender EU
allowances to comply with the EU ETS. In the short term, these
operators would have moved to a UK carbon tax regime, with the
monitoring, reporting and verification elements of the EU ETS retained.
In December 2018, the European Commission confirmed that as of exit
day in a no deal scenario:
No more auctions by the United Kingdom, no more allocation of
free allowances to the accounts administered by the United
Kingdom can take place and no exchanges of international credits
can be performed by installation and aircraft operators
administered by the UK. 204

As part of its contingency measures, the European Commission
suspended these processes from 1 January 2019 until the day after
ratification instruments concerning the Withdrawal Agreement were
deposited. This suspension notification prevented the UK Government
from issuing any 2019 allowances unless and until the suspension was
lifted (i.e. until a deal was agreed and formally approved). In a no deal
scenario, the suspension would have remained. Furthermore, the
European Commission’s Notice to Stakeholders confirmed that the UK
would no longer have been able to administer accounts in the EU ETS
Union Registry.
Prior to this, in contemplation of a then potential 29 March 2019 exit
day, both the EU and the UK took action to ensure that 2018 UK
allowances retained their value but did not completely flood the market
should the UK have left with no deal at the end of March 2019 (see Box
5). In this case, as Article 50 was extended, these measures were not
needed, and all 2018 UK allowances were valid for EU ETS compliance
and indistinguishable from allowances issued by other EU member
states.
Box 5: 2018 EUAs – planning for a 29 March 2019 no deal Brexit
As Article 50 was extended, these measures were not needed, and all 2018 UK allowances
were valid for EU ETS compliance and indistinguishable from allowances issued by other EU
member states. This information is included for background information only.

203

204

Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading Scheme (Amendment) (EU Exit) (No.2)
Regulations 2019.

European Commission Notice to Stakeholders, Withdrawal of the UK and the EU
ETS, 19 December 2018 [accessed 23 August 2019]

57 Commons Library Briefing, 19 June 2020

If the UK had left the EU ETS on exit day (then expected to be 29 March 2019), a key risk identified
during 2017 was that UK participants could flood the market with a mass sell-off of EU Allowances
which would result in a big crash in the price of carbon. In October 2017, the International Emissions
Trading Association (IETA) was reported to explain that:
A hard Brexit scenario poses a risk of approximately 220 million allowances issued by the United
Kingdom to be offloaded onto the market between 1 January 2018 and 29 March 2019. 205
To safeguard against this, both the EU and the UK amended legislation 206 aiming to avoid a mismatch
between the functioning of the EU ETS compliance timing (April 2019 for 2018 EUAs) and the timing of
exit day (then March 2019). The purpose of the amendments was to ensure that 2018 UK allowances
retained their value while also ensuring that they did not flood the market upon exit of the UK from the
EU.
The EU amended the EU ETS Registry Regulation to provide for marking and restricting the use of
allowances issued by the UK from 1 January 2018 i.e. automatically voiding any such UK allowances
and thus avoiding a flooding of the market. However, the amended Regulation provided that any EUAs
for 2018 would not be voided in the following circumstances:
•
if EU law does not cease to apply in the UK by 30 April 2019; or
•
where it is sufficiently ensured that the surrender of allowances must take place by no later than
15 March 2019 in a legally enforceable manner. 207
The UK Government laid the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading Scheme (Amendment) Regulations
2017 in December 2017 to ensure UK-issued ETS allowances would keep their value. The regulations
changed the EU ETS compliance deadline for 2018 emissions so that UK allowances will be validated
and surrendered before 15 March 2019, and so (as per bullet point 2 above) UK-issued 2018 ETS
allowances would keep their value and not be voided as a result of Brexit.
The resulting situation is explained further by the European Commission as follows:
The revised Regulation provides for marking and restricting the use of allowances issued by the
United Kingdom as of 1 January 2018, unless Union law would not cease to apply in the United
Kingdom by 30 April 2019 or it is sufficiently ensured that the surrender of allowances takes
place in a legally enforceable manner by no later than 15 March 2019.
Since the United Kingdom had informed the Committee of the adoption of a law on 27
December 2017 by which the compliance deadline for 2018 emissions has been advanced
to 15 March 2019, allowances issued by the United Kingdom for the calendar year 2018
are however not marked and are accepted for surrender. 208

A UK-wide carbon tax
The Government first published a technical notice on Meeting climate
change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal on 12 October 2018, to
set out arrangements for carbon pricing in the event that the UK had
left the EU on 31 October 2019 without a deal. 209
The Government planned that, in a no deal scenario, the UK would
have initially met its existing carbon pricing commitments via the tax
system. 210 Following the extension of Article 50, the commencement
Reuters, EU measures to safeguard carbon market from Brexit, Julia Fioretti, 18
October 2017 [accessed 9 August 2018]
206
The EU amended the EU ETS Registry Regulation; the UK amended the Greenhouse
Gas Emissions Trading Scheme Regulations 2012 by passing the Greenhouse Gas
205

Emissions Trading Scheme (Amendment) Regulations 2017

European Commission, Commission Regulation amending Commission Regulation
No 389/2013 of 2 May 2013, Article 1
208
European Commission press release: Update on safeguard measures for EU ETS (13
February 2018)
209
Gov.uk Carbon Emissions Tax technical note, 3 September 2019 [accessed 5
September 2019]
210
Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, 12 October
2018 [accessed 8 November 2018]
207

58 Brexit: Energy and Climate Change

date for the UK carbon emissions tax was amended from 15 April 2019
to 4 November 2019. 211 The tax would not have applied to the aviation
sector.
At Budget 2018, a UK-wide carbon emissions tax rate of £16/tCO2 was
announced which would have applied to EU ETS sectors for emissions
over and above an installation’s allowance (based on the EU ETS free
allowance) in the event of such a no deal scenario:
3.51 Carbon pricing following EU exit – The government
continues to plan for all scenarios as it prepares for EU exit. In the
unlikely event no mutually satisfactory agreement can be reached
and the UK departs from the EU ETS in 2019, the government
would introduce a Carbon Emissions Tax to help meet the UK’s
legally binding carbon reduction commitments under the Climate
Change Act. The tax would apply to all stationary installations
currently participating in the EU ETS from 1 April 2019. A rate of
£16 would apply to each tonne of carbon dioxide emitted over
and above an installation’s emissions allowance, which would be
based on the installation’s free allowances under the EU ETS. The
government is also legislating so it can prepare for a range of
long-term carbon pricing options. 212

This rate was broadly in line with the EU ETS pricing at that time,
although the EUA price rose to over EUR 28 in July 2019. 213 The rate for
2019 was reconfirmed at £16 per tonne by the Government in
September 2019. 214 Further information on this proposal is available in
the Government policy paper on the Carbon Emissions Tax which was
published alongside Budget 2018.
The Finance Act 2019 (Part 3) contains provisions to implement the
carbon emissions tax, to be brought into force in the event of a no deal
scenario only. Following the extension of Article 50, these provisions
were not brought into force and the carbon emissions tax was not
commenced.

Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, updated 29
July 2019 [accessed 29 July 2019]
212
HM Treasury, Budget 2018, HC 1629, October 2018
213
EUAs were at EUR 16 on 31 October 2018 and EUR 28.99 on 26 July 2019
according to ICE EUA futures via Sandbag and Quandl.
214
Gov.uk Carbon Emissions Tax technical note, 3 September 2019 [accessed 5
September 2019]
211

About the Library
The House of Commons Library research service provides MPs and their staff
with the impartial briefing and evidence base they need to do their work in
scrutinising Government, proposing legislation, and supporting constituents.
As well as providing MPs with a confidential service we publish open briefing
papers, which are available on the Parliament website.
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available research briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should
be aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated or otherwise
amended to reflect subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email papers@parliament.uk.
Authors are available to discuss the content of this briefing only with Members
and their staff.
If you have any general questions about the work of the House of Commons
you can email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.

Disclaimer
This information is provided to Members of Parliament in support of their
parliamentary duties. It is a general briefing only and should not be relied on as
a substitute for specific advice. The House of Commons or the author(s) shall
not be liable for any errors or omissions, or for any loss or damage of any kind
arising from its use, and may remove, vary or amend any information at any
time without prior notice.

BRIEFING PAPER
Number CBP 8394
19 June 2020

The House of Commons accepts no responsibility for any references or links to,
or the content of, information maintained by third parties. This information is
provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.

