House of Commons
Public Accounts Committee

Achieving Net Zero
Forty-Sixth Report of Session 2019–21
Report, together with formal minutes relating
to the report
Ordered by the House of Commons
to be printed 1 March 2021

HC 935

Published on 5 March 2021
by authority of the House of Commons

The Committee of Public Accounts
The Committee of Public Accounts is appointed by the House of Commons
to examine “the accounts showing the appropriation of the sums granted by
Parliament to meet the public expenditure, and of such other accounts laid before
Parliament as the committee may think fit” (Standing Order No. 148).
Current membership

Meg Hillier MP (Labour (Co-op), Hackney South and Shoreditch) (Chair)
Mr Gareth Bacon MP (Conservative, Orpington)
Kemi Badenoch MP (Conservative, Saffron Walden)
Shaun Bailey MP (Conservative, West Bromwich West)
Olivia Blake MP (Labour, Sheffield, Hallam)
Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown MP (Conservative, The Cotswolds)
Barry Gardiner MP (Labour, Brent North)
Dame Cheryl Gillan MP (Conservative, Chesham and Amersham)
Peter Grant MP (Scottish National Party, Glenrothes)
Mr Richard Holden MP (Conservative, North West Durham)
Sir Bernard Jenkin MP (Conservative, Harwich and North Essex)
Craig Mackinlay MP (Conservative, Thanet)
Shabana Mahmood MP (Labour, Birmingham, Ladywood)
Sarah Olney MP (Liberal Democrat, Richmond Park)
Nick Smith MP (Labour, Blaenau Gwent)
James Wild MP (Conservative, North West Norfolk)
Powers

Powers of the Committee of Public Accounts are set out in House of Commons
Standing Orders, principally in SO No. 148. These are available on the Internet via
www.parliament.uk.
Publication

© Parliamentary Copyright House of Commons 2021. This publication may be
reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at
https://www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright-parliament/.
Committee reports are published on the Committee’s website and in print by
Order of the House.
Committee staff

The current staff of the Committee are Jessica Bridges-Palmer (Media Officer),
Ameet Chudasama (Committee Operations Manager), Richard Cooke (Clerk),
Ben Shave (Chair Liaison), Rose Leach (Committee Operations Officer), Damith
Rajakaruna (Committee Operations Manager) and Wafia Zia (Second Clerk).
Contacts

All correspondence should be addressed to the Clerk of the Committee of
Public Accounts, House of Commons, London SW1A 0AA. The telephone
number for general enquiries is 020 7219 5776; the Committee’s email address is
pubaccom@parliament.uk.
You can follow the Committee on Twitter using @CommonsPAC.

Achieving Net Zero

1

Contents
Summary3
Introduction4
Conclusions and recommendations

5

1

Net zero plans and progress

8

Plans for achieving net zero

8

Progress monitoring

10

Appraising policies and projects

11

Impact on global emissions

12

Wider engagement

14

Engaging with the general public

14

Engaging with local authorities

15

2

Formal minutes

17

Witnesses18
Published written evidence

19

List of Reports from the Committee during the current Parliament

20

Achieving Net Zero

Summary
Government lacks a plan for how it will achieve net zero greenhouse gas emissions by
2050 despite setting the target almost two years ago. At present, there is no coordinated
plan with clear milestones towards achieving the target, making it difficult for
Parliament and the general public to understand or scrutinise how the country is doing
in its efforts to achieve net zero emissions. Government intends to publish a plethora of
strategies this year setting out how it will reduce emissions in different sectors ranging
from transport to the heating of buildings culminating in an overall net zero strategy.
Departments are not yet sufficiently considering the impact on net zero when taking
forward projects and programmes. The Treasury has changed its guidance for policy
appraisal to ensure departments place greater emphasis on the environmental impacts
but has not set out how this will work in practice. Government is not yet ensuring its
activities to reduce UK emissions are not simply transferring emissions overseas, which
would undermine global efforts to tackle climate change.
As much as 62% of the future reduction in emissions will rely on individual choices
and behaviours, from day to day lifestyle choices to one off purchases such as replacing
boilers that use fossil fuels or buying an electric vehicle. Government has not yet
properly engaged with the public on the substantial behaviour changes that achieving
net zero will require. Local authorities will also play a major role in the move to net
zero, and Government will need to engage more with local authorities about how they
can contribute, including ensuring they will have the necessary resources.

3

4

Achieving Net Zero

Introduction
In June 2019, government committed in law to achieving ‘net zero’ greenhouse gas
emissions by 2050, requiring the UK’s emissions in 2050 to be equal to or less than what
is removed from the atmosphere by either the natural environment or carbon capture
technologies. This target aims to deliver on the commitments it had made by signing
the Paris Agreement in 2016. Net zero is an increase in ambition from the government’s
previous target, set in 2008, to reduce net emissions by 80% by 2050 compared with 1990
levels. Reducing emissions further to achieve net zero is a colossal challenge, requiring
wide-ranging changes to the UK economy and to the way we all live our lives. This
includes further investment in renewable electricity generation, as well as changing the
way people travel, how land is used and how buildings are heated. The all-encompassing
nature of achieving net zero means that organisations across central and local government,
as well as the public, all have a role to play. The Department for Business, Energy and
Industrial Strategy (the Department) has overall responsibility for achieving net zero. It
also has lead responsibility for decarbonising many of the highest-emitting sectors of the
economy, such as power and industry. The Department must work with the Devolved
Administrations and other departments, such as the Ministry of Housing, Communities
and Local Government, Department for Environment, Food & Rural Affairs and the
Department for Transport, which each hold responsibility for decarbonisation in their
respective policy areas. Progress has not been uniform and whilst emissions from power
have declined by 62% between 2008–2018, surface transport emissions have declined by
only 3% over the same time period. HM Treasury has a key role to play given it allocates
budgets to government departments and is central to assessing the relative priority of
policies across government and in ensuring departments have the funding needed for
programmes to reduce emissions.

Achieving Net Zero

5

Conclusions and recommendations
1.

Government has not set out how it plans to achieve net zero despite having set
the target in 2019. In June 2019, Parliament legislated for ‘net zero’ greenhouse
gas emissions by 2050. The Department plans to launch a net zero strategy before
the UK hosts the 26th UN Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP26)
conference in November 2021. The Department aims that the strategy will set out
the government’s vision for transitioning to a net zero economy, providing much
needed clarity for stakeholders. But this nonetheless means that it will have taken
Government over two years to set out its plans. Prior to the launch of the strategy,
departments intend to publish several sector strategies, including for transport,
heating, tree planting and energy. However, the publication of many of these
strategies has already been delayed. For example, the Heat and Buildings strategy
has been delayed from August 2020 to early 2021 at the earliest. The Department
plans to publish many of the remaining strategies over the next 12 months but has
not yet confirmed what will be published when.
Recommendation: The Department should ensure that the key sector strategies,
and the overarching net zero strategy, are published by September 2021. These
strategies should include a clear timeline of key net zero milestones and decision
points, to give Parliament and the public an overview of government’s net zero
plans, what it plans to achieve and when.

2.

The Department is not yet reporting on the programmes across government that
are crucial to the delivery of net zero in a way that enables Parliament or the public
to scrutinise progress. In early 2019, government established new arrangements
for coordinating the departments involved in achieving net zero. The Department
has overall responsibility for achieving net zero and for ensuring cross-government
arrangements are working effectively and that departments are reducing emissions
over time towards achieving net zero. But there is no single place where information
is brought together about the overall progress of key net zero policies, or a clear
set of measures which can be consistently used to judge progress. This limits the
Department’s ability to identify potential issues with achieving net zero and take
corrective action if necessary. The Department is working with the Climate Change
Committee to develop new measures of progress that are more straightforward
to understand, which it expects could be used both for monitoring as well as in
public communication of progress towards net zero. The Department must publish
its plans and targets for all sectors and make clear to the public how government
actions, such as the recent decision not to intervene over the local granting of
planning permission to a coal mine in Cumbria, are consistent with its trajectory to
net zero. Otherwise, government runs the risk of sending the wrong messages to the
public about its commitment to this goal.
Recommendation: The Department should develop a clear set of metrics that
provide a system-wide view of progress towards net zero. These metrics, which
should include reporting on progress of emissions levels compared to expectations
within each sector, should be reported regularly from the end of 2021, in as close
to real time as is feasible and produced in a user-friendly manner for the public.

6

Achieving Net Zero

3.

HM Treasury has not yet clarified how it will ensure net zero is given adequate
weight in the assessment of government policies and projects. Achieving net
zero will be an all-encompassing challenge requiring all parts of government to
contribute to reducing emissions. Therefore, government must build net zero into
the structures and processes that govern departmental spending and prioritisation.
For example, by assessing the carbon impact of new projects or programmes to
consider their impact on achieving net zero. The Treasury’s Green Book guidance
requires all policy, programme and project proposals to consider environment and
climate impacts, including UK greenhouse gas emissions. The Treasury has recently
reviewed this guidance and is now looking to place more emphasis on strategic
objectives such as net zero in the assessment of proposals. But departments’
capability to assess climate impacts is varied, with the skills needed concentrated
in the Department. The requirements as set out in the revised Green Book will
have less impact than the Treasury intends, and ultimately programmes will not
contribute to achieving net zero, if a lack of capability across departments means
they are not put into practice.
Recommendation: HM Treasury should, within two months, write to us outlining:

4.

•

how it will ensure its guidance, such as the Green Book, will lead to
departments adequately considering and reporting the impact of policy
decisions on net zero; how all fiscal stimulus packages and infrastructure
proposals will be stress tested against net zero and what measures will be
incorporated into the Green Book to ensure projects are only approved if
they align with 2050 net-zero target; and

•

how it will ensure the development of skills across Whitehall to assess the
impact of decisions on net zero.

Government does not have a clear way of determining whether its actions to
reduce emissions in the UK are transferring emissions to other countries. The
net zero target applies to emissions generated within the UK and does not include
emissions from the production of goods that are imported. This approach aligns
with internationally agreed rules to prevent double counting of emissions. It is
critical that actions to reduce the UK’s emissions do not result in simply moving
them abroad, which would undermine global efforts to limit temperature rises. This
could happen, for example, if UK policies push high-emitting industries (such as
some manufacturing) abroad rather than ensuring those industries become carbon
neutral. HM Treasury considers that this risk is lessened as other countries reduce
their own emissions. But if the UK decarbonises more quickly than other countries
(particularly countries it imports from), there will be a risk in the short term that
policies to reduce emissions transfers them abroad instead.
Recommendation: The Department should review how policies aimed at reducing
UK-based emissions take into account the risk that emissions are passed to
other countries and explore how to make the level of emissions generated in the
manufacture of imported goods more transparent.

5.

Government has not adequately communicated to the general public the changes
that individuals will need to make in the transition to net zero emissions.

Achieving Net Zero

7

Achieving net zero will depend on individuals choosing to change their behaviour,
from personal lifestyle choices, as well as decisions that rely to some degree on
related technological developments such as buying an electric car or changing how
they heat their homes. The Climate Change Committee estimated in 2019 that 62%
of remaining emissions reductions will rely to some degree on individual choices
and behaviours. But there is a disconnect between people’s concern about climate
change and their understanding of what is required to achieve emissions reductions
in the UK. There has so far been no coordinated government messaging about the
changes and choices people will need to make. A key challenge will be engaging
with, and supporting, those who are currently employed in sectors that will either
decline as part of the transition to net zero, such as oil and gas extraction, or will
need to significantly change, such as mechanics who must transition to working
primarily on electric vehicles. Supporting these people could be complementary
to the ‘levelling up’ agenda whereby Government aims to create opportunity for
everyone in all regions and address disparities in economic and social outcomes.
The Department established a public engagement team to begin work in April 2020
but accepts that it needs to do more on its communication with the public.
Recommendation: The Department should, in the next 12 months, develop a
public engagement strategy that sets out how communications will be coordinated.
6.

The Department has not sufficiently engaged with local authorities on their role
in the achievement of net zero across the UK. Local authorities have significant
scope to influence emissions in their area, both by leading decarbonisation of sectors
(such as housing and transport) and by influencing local businesses and residents to
take climate action themselves. However, local government representatives report a
lack of clarity from central government on the role local authorities should play in
achieving net zero, what will be expected of them or how they will be supported.
The Local Government Association’s Climate Change Survey 2020 found that nine
out of 10 councils have declared a climate emergency and 80% have set a carbon
neutral target. But local authorities face a wide range of barriers to tackling climate
change. Ninety-six per cent of local authorities report that funding is a barrier to
them tackling climate change, and 93% that legislation or regulation is a barrier.
Lack of workforce capacity or a lack of skills is also a cause for concern, with 88%
and 78% of local authorities in the survey respectively reporting this as a barrier to
tackling climate change.
Recommendation: Government should respond with a coherent National Fiscal
and Policy Framework. This should set out Government’s national responsibilities.
Local Authorities local and regional responsibilities and be clear how government
proposes to work with local authorities to secure the funding, skills, resources and
outcomes required to deliver Net Zero.

8

Achieving Net Zero

1 Net zero plans and progress
1. On the basis of a report by the Comptroller and Auditor General, we took evidence
from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (the Department) and
HM Treasury about achieving net zero.1
2. In June 2019, government passed legislation committing it to achieving ‘net zero’
greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. This means reducing emissions substantially from
current levels, requiring the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions in 2050 to be equal to or
less than what is removed from the atmosphere by either the natural environment or
carbon capture technologies. Government set the net zero target to deliver on the
commitments it had made by signing the Paris Agreement in 2016. As part of the Paris
Agreement,189 countries and territories committed to pursuing ways to limit global
temperature rises this century to well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels
and to try to limit the temperature increase further to just 1.5 degrees Celsius.2
3. Net zero is an increase in ambition from the government’s previous target, set in
2008, to reduce net emissions by 80% by 2050 compared with 1990 levels. In 2018, the
UK emitted 496 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (the unified measure of
greenhouse gas emissions combining all greenhouse gases). Between 2008 and 2018, the
UK’s emissions reduced by 28%, faster than any other G20 economy. The power sector was
responsible for 56% of the overall decrease in emissions between 2008 and 2018, industry
for 22% and waste for 9%. Reducing emissions further to achieve net zero is a colossal
challenge, requiring wide-ranging changes to the UK economy and to the way we all
live our lives, including further investment in renewable electricity generation, as well as
changing the way people travel, how land is used and how buildings are heated.3
4. The Department has overall responsibility in government for achieving net zero.
It also has lead responsibility for decarbonising many of the highest-emitting sectors of
the economy, such as power and industry. HM Treasury has a key role to play given it
allocates budgets to government departments. It is central to assessing the relative priority
of policies across government and ensuring that departments have sufficient financial
resources to manage programmes aimed at reducing emissions. The Department must
work with devolved administrations and other departments, like the Ministry of Housing,
Communities and Local Government (MHCLG), Department for Environment, Food &
Rural Affairs (Defra) and the Department for Transport, which each hold responsibility
for decarbonisation in their respective policy areas.4

Plans for achieving net zero
5. Government introduced the net zero target through an amendment to the Climate
Change Act (2008), which originally set a target of at least an 80% reduction in net
greenhouse gas emissions in the UK relative to 1990 levels. Government also aimed to
set an example for other countries to follow in the run-up to hosting the 26th United
Nations’ Climate Change Conference of the Parties (COP26). The Climate Change Act
required government to set ‘carbon budgets’, legally binding targets for UK emissions over
1
2
3
4

C&AG’s Report, Achieving net zero, Session 2019-21, HC 1035, 4 December 2020
Q 1: C&AG’s Report, paras 1, 1.2-1.3
C&AG’s Report, paras 2, 1.6, 1.8-1.9, Figure 2 and Figure 4
C&AG’s Report, paras 3, 1.5, 1.15-1.16, Figure 5

Achieving Net Zero

9

a five-year period. The first five carbon budgets, up to 2032, were set to achieve progress
towards the 80% reduction target.5 In December 2020, the Prime Minister announced a
new target to reduce the UK’s emissions by at least 68% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels
to put it on a pathway to net zero.6 The Climate Change Committee (CCC), which advises
the UK and devolved administrations on meeting their emissions reductions targets and
preparing for climate change, has recommended that the UK sets a Sixth Carbon Budget
to require a reduction in UK greenhouse gas emissions of 78% by 2035 relative to 1990, in
line with net zero.7
6. The UK met the first and second carbon budget and the Department currently
forecasts that it is very likely to achieve the third carbon budget but will fall short against
carbon budgets 4 and 5, from 2023 to 2027 and 2028 to 2032, respectively. We asked the
Department how it could be confident that it would achieve the new 68% target when it
was off track for the less ambitious fourth and fifth carbon budgets and what action it was
taking to get back on track. The Department explained that it would establish additional
policies to close the gap by publishing sector strategies over the next year, culminating in
an overall net zero strategy. The Department told us that its success to date in achieving
reductions in carbon emissions gave it confidence it could make the huge transformation
needed. However, the majority of the reductions so far have been achieved in the power
sector and required less behaviour change by consumers than would be necessary for
other sectors that need to decarbonise, such as heat and transport.8
7. The government originally planned to publish many of its strategies during 2020.
Publication was later than it previously intended, partly because of reprioritisation of
Government activity in response to the coronavirus crisis.9 For example, the publication
of the Heat and Buildings strategy was delayed from August 2020 and is yet to be
published. Publication of the Fuel Poverty strategy was similarly delayed from April 2020
and did not publish until to February 2021.10 The Department told us that it would like
to have published many of the sector strategies months earlier than they were likely to
be published. It asserted that it was now in a good place to publish them and expected
the strategies to be stronger as a result of the delay and would reflect a greater degree of
political commitment. It accepted that the strategies would need to be clear, and provide
detail, about the policies, timing and process that underpinned them. It told us that
this particularly applied for high-emitting sectors including buildings, transport and
industry. We asked the Department when the strategies were now due to be published and
to provide a publication programme for the next 12 months. The Department would not
provide details of the months that it planned to publish the individual strategies, asserting
that it would ‘put them out at the right time, when they are ready’. It told us it expected
the Heat and Building strategy and the fuel poverty strategy very soon, followed by the
industrial decarbonisation, hydrogen and transport strategies. It expected to publish the

5
6
7
8
9
10

Q 8; C&AG’s Report, para 1, 1-2-1.4
Q 6; GOV.UK, Press release, UK sets ambitious new climate target head of UN Summit, 3 December 2020
Q 7; C&AG’s Report, para 1.10; Climate Change Committee, The Sixth Carbon Budget, The UK’s path to net zero,
December 2020, page 13
Qq 6-8; C&AG’s Report, paras 6-7, 3.26
Q 18; C&AG’s Report, para 3.2, Figure 9
C&AG’s Report, Figure 9; Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Sustainable Warmth, Protecting
Vulnerable Households in England, February 2021

10

Achieving Net Zero

nature strategy later in 2021, before the net zero strategy. The Department told us that
it was ‘very confident’ that it would be able to publish a net zero strategy in advance of
COP26.11

Progress monitoring
8. In early 2019, government established new coordination arrangements for the
departments involved in achieving net zero. The arrangements include: cabinet committees
for climate action strategy (chaired by the Prime Minister) and implementation; a Climate
Change National Strategy Implementation Group (NSIG) of senior officials from the main
departments involved; a net zero steering board for strategy and delivery supporting the
NSIG; and boards within departments to oversee progress of emissions reductions.12 The
Department’s overall responsibility for achieving net zero means it is responsible for
ensuring cross-government arrangements are working effectively. The NAO found that
while the Department reported actual and forecast greenhouse gas emissions annually
and progress against the carbon budgets, giving it a high-level view of whether the UK is
on track to meet net zero, it had not yet embedded performance monitoring into its crossgovernment coordination arrangements. It did not have a consolidated list of policies key
to achieving net zero, nor did it collate data on how these policies were performing overall.
This meant that the Department could not identify the key risks and issues emerging
across government activities to achieve net zero that needed to be escalated to senior
groups such as the cabinet committees.13
9. We asked what the Department was doing to ensure that it would be able to track
progress towards net zero when responsibility was shared across departments. The
Department told us that the new coordination structures provided it with clarity on total
emissions and the level of emissions for which each department has responsibility. It asserted
that this meant each department could be held to account for its area of responsibility
while the Department was overall accountable for total emissions. It also explained that
departments would be set an overall emissions ‘envelope’, which all emissions related to
their policy decisions must come in under and that this envelope would fall over time.
The Department acknowledged that it needed to enhance its reporting on the different
net zero delivery programmes across government and told us that it had tasked a net zero
governance team to work on this issue.14 The Treasury told us that the Department was
working with the Climate Change Committee (CCC) to develop measures that could be
used to track progress. It explained, however, that it would take ‘some time’ to develop this
and make sure that it was designed and implemented in the right way, but that it hoped
to improve the data and information available to make policy and spending decisions this
year.15
10. We asked the Department about the recent decision to allow deep coal mining in
Whitehaven, Cumbria and how this aligned with the government’s intention to move
away from depending on fossil fuels and towards cleaner energy sources. The Department
told us that the mine in question was for coking coal rather than producing power, a
necessary fuel for steel production for which there is, currently, no green substitute.
11
12
13
14
15

Qq 18-19, 23
C&AG’s Report, para 2.2, Figure 6
Q 30; C&AG’s Report, paras 3, 16, 3.15-3.16
Qq 31, 33, 45
Qq 58-60; C&AG’s Report, para 3.15

Achieving Net Zero

11

The Department stated that the steel industry was expected to decarbonise later than
other sectors but accepted that the UK nonetheless needed to move to clean steel. More
broadly, the Department commented that it is not possible simply to “switch off” certain
high-emitting industries and acknowledged that there is a need to help the public better
understand that net zero will come in stages with some industries decarbonising later
than others.16 We asked that the Department ensures it publishes targets and milestones
encompassing all sectors and that these are brought together and updated regularly so the
public can see, in one place, what progress has been made.17

Appraising policies and projects
11. Net zero is an all-encompassing challenge that will affect every part of government.
It will not be achieved if it is not sufficiently prioritised when departments make decisions
that could impact on greenhouse gas emissions.18 We asked whether other departmental
priorities, such as building enough homes, could supersede net zero and if the Department
had the power to overrule these decisions in favour of net zero. We also asked how net
zero was being prioritised in decisions like the granting of North Sea oil and gas licences,
which could send the wrong message to the public about Government’s commitment to net
zero. The Department explained that achieving net zero relied on its system of collective
ownership, which should ensure everyone acted in support of the overall goal, rather than
one department directing all others. The Department expected that where departments
consistently fall behind, they would be held to account through the new coordination
arrangements, which run from the Prime Minister and the Cabinet Committees, to the
relevant secretary of state and the department itself, to ensure necessary action was taken
to achieve net zero. The NAO found that spending reviews, led by HM Treasury, will be
crucial to achieving net zero, as they allocate budgets to departments in the medium term
(typically three to five years) and will provide an opportunity to encourage a coordinated
approach. The Treasury and Department agreed that an important change in the most
recent spending review was including officials from the Department to help scrutinise
departments’ bids to ensure they aligned with the wider net zero strategy.19
12. The Treasury’s Green Book guidance requires all policy, programme and project
proposals to consider environment and climate impacts, including UK greenhouse gas
emissions. The Department noted that this was another means by which the compatibility
of departments’ decisions with net zero could be taken into account.20 HM Treasury
has recently reviewed the Green Book guidance, due to concerns that the guidance may
undermine the Government’s aim to “level up” poorer parts of the UK. The updated Green
Book emphasises the importance of demonstrating the fit of a proposed intervention with
government’s strategic objectives, such as net zero, and highlighting whether it supports
or conflicts with them.21 The Treasury told us that departments, in line with Green Book
guidance, should be considering the impact of policies on wider strategic objectives, such
as net zero, even if policies were not directly related to climate change.22
16
17
18
19
20
21
22

Qq 5-6, 36
Qq 23, 29
C&AG’s Report, para 3, 2.11
Q 31-33, 36; C&AG’s Report para 10, 2.11
Q 32; C&AG’s Report para 2.12
HM Treasury, Green Book Review 2020: Findings and response, Box 2.A, para 1.3, 3.5
Qq 54, 64

12

Achieving Net Zero

13. We asked what impact measures such as the Green Book guidance had on major
infrastructure projects like High Speed 2. The Department told us that departments
were each responsible for ensuring that the projects within their areas remained below
their overall emissions envelope and that it did not micromanage individual projects.
It explained that in the case of the Department for Transport, the plans to achieve net
zero would include a range of transport modes, from cycling, walking, cars, trains and
planes, as well as core infrastructure projects such as HS2. It explained that this provided
departments flexibility to balance their projects’ greenhouse gas emissions as if they went
over on one project, the departments would need to find savings elsewhere.23
14. We asked the Treasury why, in its updated Green Book, it had not introduced a specific
requirement for policies to explain how they aligned with net zero. The Treasury told us
that the guidance already required Departments to consider greenhouse gas emissions as
part of their appraisal process.24 The NAO found, however, that Departments’ adherence
to guidance, including that in the Green Book, was often inconsistent. The Treasury
accepted that taking greenhouse emissions into account was “not always happening on a
consistent basis” and that it needed to do more to set the expectations of Departments.25
In the most recent spending review, the Treasury asked departments to provide a detailed
assessment of the climate impact of their capital expenditure plans, but not all departments
did so. It explained that the main issue was the capability of departments, as much of the
capability for assessing the climate impact of policies sits within the Department. The
Treasury recognised that there was more it could do to ensure departments have the tools
and capabilities to assess the climate impact of policies.26

Impact on global emissions
15. Limiting global temperature rises to reduce the climate change impacts will require
a global reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. The net zero target applies to emissions
generated in the UK and does not include emissions generated in the production of goods
imported into the UK. This is consistent with internationally-agreed rules around climate
change targets to prevent double counting of emissions.27 We asked about the potential
risk that if Government policies reduce emissions in the UK but at the expense of higher
emissions abroad then the UK’s progress towards net zero could mask the fact that global
emissions are not reducing.28 The CCC found that the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions were
69% higher in 2016 if emissions generated in imports were included and that imported
emissions have risen as a fraction of the UK’s total greenhouse gas emissions. This, it
reported, reflected the UK’s progress in reducing emissions domestically and that the
UK imports energy-intensive industrial products like steel. The CCC also emphasised the
importance of government prioritising actions that reduce both UK-generated emissions
and imported emissions, such as increasing energy efficiency and reducing waste.29
16. We asked how the Department would ensure that the impact of the UK’s progress
towards net zero would not inadvertently result in higher emissions elsewhere. The
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Q 45
Q 62
Q 54; C&AG’s Report, para 2.13
Qq 32 & 62
C&AG’s report, para 1.2; Climate Change Committee, Net Zero, 2019, pp 47, 105
Q 20
Climate Change Committee, Net Zero, 2019, pp 47, 104, 105

Achieving Net Zero

13

Department told us that, so far, reductions in the UK’s emissions had been the result of
real change, particularly in the power and industrial sectors, and not the result of pushing
emissions abroad, but that it was monitoring this. HM Treasury similarly told us that
as other countries decarbonise, imports from those countries will have less embedded
carbon and so the risk of pushing emissions abroad would be reduced. The Department
told us that emissions generated in imports were difficult to estimate, which is why it was
not used as an overall target. It noted that preventing the export of emissions in general
relied on careful policy design. For example, regulating the carbon make-up of products
on the market, rather than solely regulating how goods are made in this country.30
17. We asked about the feasibility of a tax based on carbon embedded in imports
(a carbon border adjustment tax) to reduce the risk of pushing emissions abroad. The
Treasury told us that it was considering this as part of its net zero review. It explained that
it needed to further investigate the proposal, particularly whether it would be effective in
maintaining UK jobs and facilitating decarbonisation in the Global South, how it could
be implemented and whether it would comply with World Trade Organisation rules. It
explained that the European Commission was considering a carbon border adjustment
tax and it expected to learn from this about how the UK could tackle the issue of imported
carbon in future.31

30
31

Qq 20-21
Qq 21-22

14

Achieving Net Zero

2 Wider engagement
Engaging with the general public
18. Achieving net zero will depend on people changing their habits and lifestyles, adopting
new technologies, and in some cases big personal investments. For example, buying zeroemission vehicles, such as electric vehicles, instead of cars that run on petrol or diesel;
changing the way they heat their homes by replacing domestic gas boilers with renewable
alternatives, such as electric heat pumps; and lifestyle changes such as consuming fewer
meat and dairy products. The Climate Change Committee (CCC) estimated in 2019 that
62% of the remaining emissions reductions will happen either through individual choices
and behaviours, some of which will require the development of new technologies. But it
also found that there was a disconnect between people’s concern about climate change
and their understanding of what is required to achieve emissions reductions in the UK.32
19. We asked the Department what it was doing to ensure the step change needed by
members of the public to achieve net zero and how it was communicating to people
about the decisions or changes they needed to make and when. The Department told us
that so far, a lot of the changes to reduce emissions reductions have not required major
behavioural change, but many of those that will be needed in the future will do. It explained
that, where possible, it would look for solutions that did not require “excessively drastic
behaviour change” which was why initiatives such as electric vehicles were so important.
In April 2020, the Department established a behaviour change and public engagement
team for net zero to begin designing a public engagement strategy and share good practice
across government. The Department accepted, however, that it was not yet providing an
integrated picture of public engagement and that there was more work it needed to do to
address this gap in 2021.33 It told us that it would be important to ensure that its public
engagement strategy was sufficiently broad to allow the public to understand the wider
context of its communications and messages. For example, it explained that it would be
important to enable people to understand the continuing importance in the short term of
high-emitting industries, such as coal, oil and gas, and their role in employment and the
resilience of the energy system.34
20. Government investment in new technologies, such as carbon capture and storage,
could benefit particular regions of the UK and support the government’s levelling
up agenda, which aims to create opportunity for everyone in all regions and address
disparities in economic and social outcomes.35 We asked the Department about ensuring
the transition to a net zero economy was done in a just way, in particular the planned
skills and training support for people working in sectors expected to decline or change
significantly as part of the move to net zero, so that they were prepared for the change. We
specifically asked about people who will have to move into different kinds of employment,
such as car manufacturing moving to predominantly electric vehicles or people moving
from the oil and gas sectors into solar power. The Department confirmed that developing
these skills would be very important, but told us that while this was a big area of focus,
there was time before developing sectors such as carbon capture will be employing people
32
33
34
35

Q 34, C&AG’s Report paras 8, 3.23, Figure 12
Q 34; C&AG’s Report, para 8
Qq 36-37
C&AG’s Report, paras 1.9

Achieving Net Zero

15

at scale. It noted that, as one of the important opportunities for new job creation, it would
be important to ensure that plans for net zero provided job in the right locations and
weren’t only concentrated in the south-east. It also recognised that it would need to ensure
that its plans were integrated into the Department for Education’s work on skills and
explained it was working with the Department for Education to identify the people and
skills the industries affected would need.36

Engaging with local authorities
21. Local authorities have a key role to play in achieving net zero. They have significant
scope to influence emissions in their area, for example, by leading decarbonisation of sectors
such as housing and transport. These represent a substantial proportion of UK emissions,
and where the emissions reduction challenge will vary by location. Local authorities can
also influence local businesses and residents to take climate action themselves. The NAO
found that government’s co-ordination arrangements for net zero only extended to central
government departments.37 We received written evidence from the Local Government
Association (LGA), which told us that the Government needed to outline national and
local government responsibilities and commit to working with local government bodies
to deliver net zero. It also told us that there needed to be an engagement process between
central and local government to support councils to develop local net zero delivery plans
and invest in green solutions.38 The Department agreed that local authorities were very
important partners in delivering decarbonisation schemes such as the green homes grant
and the local authority delivery scheme. It also recognised that local authorities had a
lot of the planning capabilities and statutory duties which would be very important for
example, when thinking about investment in heat networks. It accepted that it would be
increasingly important to engage with local authorities.39
22. In written evidence, the LGA told us that there was a long-term funding gap in
government’s ambitions to decarbonise housing. In February 2020, the LGA’s Climate
Change Survey 2020 found that nine out of 10 councils had declared a climate emergency
and 80% had set a carbon neutral target.40 But the survey found that local authorities faced
numerous barriers to tackling climate change. Ninety-six per cent of respondents reported
that funding was a barrier to their local authority tackling climate change, and 93% that
legislation or regulation was a barrier. Lack of workforce capacity or a lack of skills was
also a cause for concern, with 88% and 78% of local authorities in the survey respectively
reporting this as a barrier to tackling climate change. Respondents who noted legislation
or regulation as a barrier highlighted a range of issues including building regulations
not being environmentally rigorous and that the National Planning Policy Framework or
planning regulations were insufficiently ambitious.41
23. The Department acknowledged that it needed to consider place-related aspects to
achieving net zero and how local authorities could be involved in co-ordinating the
changes needed in areas such as transport and energy.42 The Department told the National
36
37
38
39
40
41
42

Qq 52-53, 65-67
C&AG’s Report, para 2.19-2.21
Local Government Association submission para 4
Q 39
Q 43; Local Government Association submission para 7
Local Government Association submission para 7; Local Government Association, Climate Change Survey,
Research report, February 2020 pages 2, 35
Qq 40-41

16

Achieving Net Zero

Audit Office that it intended to engage with local authorities about their role as part of the
creation of the net zero strategy.43 During our evidence session, the Department further
committed to actively engaging with local authorities on how sector strategies will be
rolled out, as the strategies were published. The Department noted that it had provided
toolkits to raise the capability and capacity within local authorities and has local energy
hubs to enable engagement with them. These hubs aimed to help local authorities to
develop plans to attract investment and fund the development and sharing of best practice
between local authorities.44

43
44

C&AG’s Report, paras 11, 2.22
Qq 39, 44; C&AG’s Report, para 2.22

Achieving Net Zero

17

Formal minutes
Monday 1 March 2021
Virtual meeting
Members present:
Meg Hillier, in the Chair
Mr Gareth Bacon

Mr Richard Holden

Olivia Blake

Sarah Olney

Sir Geoffrey Clifton-Brown

James Wild

Peter Grant
Draft Report (Achieving Net Zero), proposed by the Chair, brought up and read.
Ordered, That the draft Report be read a second time, paragraph by paragraph.
Paragraphs 1 to 23 read and agreed to.
Summary agreed to.
Introduction agreed to.
Conclusions and recommendations agreed to.
Resolved, That the Report be the Forty-sixth of the Committee to the House.
Ordered, That the Chair make the Report to the House.
Ordered, That embargoed copies of the Report be made available, in accordance with the
provisions of Standing Order No. 134.
[Adjourned till Thursday 4 March at 9:15am

18

Achieving Net Zero

Witnesses
The following witnesses gave evidence. Transcripts can be viewed on the inquiry publications
page of the Committee’s website.

Thursday 28 January 2021
Sarah Munby, Permanent Secretary, Department for Business, Energy and
Industrial Strategy; Julian Critchlow, Director General, Energy Transformation
and Clean Growth, Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy;
Steve Field, Director, Climate, Environment, Energy, HM Treasury

Q1–84

Achieving Net Zero

19

Published written evidence
The following written evidence was received and can be viewed on the inquiry publications
page of the Committee’s website.
ANZ numbers are generated by the evidence processing system and so may not be complete.
1

Aldersgate Group (ANZ0002)

2

Cadent Gas (ANZ0003)

3

Christian Aid (ANZ0008)

4

Climate Econometrics, Nuffield College, Oxford University (ANZ0005)

5

HP (ANZ0018)

6

Federation of Master Builders (ANZ0012)

7

Green Alliance (ANZ0010)

8

Institution of Civil Engineers) (ANZ0001)

9

Local Government Association (ANZ0007)

10

Marshall Consultancy Limited (ANZ0009)

11

Mineral Products Association (ANZ0004)

12

Natural England (ANZ0017)

13

Policy Connect (ANZ0011)

14

Porterbrook (ANZ0016)

15

Institution of Civil Engineers) (ANZ0001)

16

Road Haulage Association (ANZ0006)

17

SSE (ANZ0014)

18

Smart Energy GB (ANZ0013)

19

London Energy Transformation Initiative (ANZ0015)

20

Achieving Net Zero

List of Reports from the Committee
during the current Parliament
All publications from the Committee are available on the publications page of the
Committee’s website.

Session 2019–21
Number

Title

Reference

1st

Support for children with special educational needs and
disabilities

HC 85

2nd

Defence Nuclear Infrastructure

HC 86

3rd

High Speed 2: Spring 2020 Update

HC 84

4th

EU Exit: Get ready for Brexit Campaign

HC 131

5th

University technical colleges

HC 87

6th

Excess votes 2018–19

HC 243

7th

Gambling regulation: problem gambling and protecting
vulnerable people

HC 134

8th

NHS capital expenditure and financial management

HC 344

9th

Water supply and demand management

HC 378

10th

Defence capability and the Equipment Plan

HC 247

11th

Local authority investment in commercial property

HC 312

12th

Management of tax reliefs

HC 379

13th

Whole of Government Response to COVID-19

HC 404

14th

Readying the NHS and social care for the COVID-19 peak

HC 405

15th

Improving the prison estate

HC 244

16th

Progress in remediating dangerous cladding

HC 406

17th

Immigration enforcement

HC 407

18th

NHS nursing workforce

HC 408

19th

Restoration and renewal of the Palace of Westminster

HC 549

20th

Tackling the tax gap

HC 650

21st

Government support for UK exporters

HC 679

22nd

Digital transformation in the NHS

HC 680

23rd

Delivering carrier strike

HC 684

24th

Selecting towns for the Towns Fund

HC 651

25th

Asylum accommodation and support transformation
programme

HC 683

26th

Department of Work and Pensions Accounts 2019–20

HC 681

27th

Covid-19: Supply of ventilators

HC 685

Achieving Net Zero

Number

Title

Reference

28th

The Nuclear Decommissioning Authority’s management of
the Magnox contract

HC 653

29th

Whitehall preparations for EU Exit

HC 682

30th

The production and distribution of cash

HC 654

31st

Starter Homes

HC 88

32nd

Specialist Skills in the civil service

HC 686

33rd

Covid-19: Bounce Back Loan Scheme

HC 687

34th

Covid-19: Support for jobs

HC 920

35th

Improving Broadband

HC 688

36th

HMRC performance 2019–20

HC 690

37th

Whole of Government Accounts 2018–19

HC 655

38th

Managing colleges’ financial sustainability

HC 692

39th

Lessons from major projects and programmes

HC 694

40th

Achieving government’s long-term environmental goals

HC 927

41st

COVID 19: the free school meals voucher scheme

HC 689

42nd

COVID-19: Government procurement and supply of Personal
Protective Equipment

HC 928

43rd

COVID-19: Planning for a vaccine Part 1

HC 930

44th

Excess Votes 2019–20

HC 1205

45th

Managing flood risk

HC 931

21

