By Elena Ares
12 October 2021

COP26: the international
climate change conference,
Glasgow, UK

Summary
1
Background
2 UK Presidency of COP26

commonslibrary.parliament.uk

Number 8868

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

Disclaimer
The Commons Library does not intend the information in our research
publications and briefings to address the specific circumstances of any
particular individual. We have published it to support the work of MPs. You
should not rely upon it as legal or professional advice, or as a substitute for
it. We do not accept any liability whatsoever for any errors, omissions or
misstatements contained herein. You should consult a suitably qualified
professional if you require specific advice or information. Read our briefing
‘Legal help: where to go and how to pay’ for further information about
sources of legal advice and help. This information is provided subject to the
conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.
Feedback
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should be
aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated to reflect
subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email
papers@parliament.uk. Please note that authors are not always able to
engage in discussions with members of the public who express opinions
about the content of our research, although we will carefully consider and
correct any factual errors.
You can read our feedback and complaints policy and our editorial policy at
commonslibrary.parliament.uk. If you have general questions about the work
of the House of Commons email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.

2

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

Contents
1

Background

5

1.1

Paris Agreement and 1.5oC target

5

1.2

IPCC Sixth Assessment Report published

6

1.3

Previous Climate Change COPs

7

1.4

COP26

7

2

UK Presidency of COP26

9

2.1

COP26 Priorities

11

Priorities for the negotiations

12

Preparatory work

13

2.2

14

Progress to date

Nationally Determined Contributions

17

Climate Finance

19

Least Developed Countries view

21

2.3

Emerging elements for the negotiations

22

2.4

Milan Pre-COP meeting

3

Error! Bookmark not defined.

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

Summary
In November 2021 the UK and Italy will jointly host the 26th Conference of the
Parties (COP26). This is the international United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) conference on climate change held
every year and attended by signatory countries and other parties, 196 in total.
The UK will host the COP events. The pre-COP Summit and other preparatory
events such as a youth event will be held in Italy. The UK and Italian
governments have committed to putting climate and nature at the heart of
the multilateral agenda in 2021, including through the G7, G20 and COP26
Presidencies.
According to the UK Government, COP26 will be the largest summit the UK has
ever hosted, with over 30,000 delegates, including world leaders, experts,
campaigners and government officials. Further details can be found on the
UKCOP26 website. Alok Sharma is President Designate for COP26 having
stepped down from his BEIS Ministerial role in January 2020, to work on
COP26 full time.
Alok Sharma set out the four UK key goals for COP26 in a speech in March
2020:
1.

2.
3.
4.

All countries to submit more ambitious Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs), committing to further cuts in carbon emissions by
2030.
All countries to commit to reach net zero emissions as soon as possible
Developed countries to honour their commitments, including meeting the
2020 US$100bn dollar a year goal for climate finance
Seeking to agree a package which takes forward the Paris Agreement.

He also provided an update on progress on all the goals to Parliament in a
written statement on COP26 on 18 March 2021.
A range of bilateral and multilateral meetings and high level events will have
taken place throughout 2020 and 2021 in advance of the COP26 meeting.
Alok Sharma wrote a letter to all parties on 22 September 2021 in which he set
out the remaining discussion that would take place in advance of COP26. The
letter also set out the “emerging elements of the COP26 negotiated outcome”.
In advance of the COP26, developed countries that have not fully set out the
Nationally Determined Contributions are being urged to do so. Developing
countries are also calling for commitments on climate finance to be met
going forward to 2025.

4

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

1

Background

In November 2021 the UK and Italy will jointly host the 26th Conference of the
Parties (COP26). This is the international United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) conference on climate change held
every year and attended by signatory countries and other parties, 196 in total.
The UK will host the COP events. The pre-COP Summit and other preparatory
events such as a youth event will be held in Italy.
The UNFCCC was adopted during the 1992 Earth Summit, held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. It entered into force in 1994 and has been ratified by 196
States (including both the EU and the UK) which constitute the “Parties” to the
Convention. The objective of the Treaty, set out in article 2 of the Convention,
is to “stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level
that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate
system.”

1.1

Paris Agreement and 1.5oC target
In December 2015, agreement was reached at COP21 in Paris to keep a global
temperature rise this century well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and
to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase even further to 1.5°C. The
Paris Agreement entered into force on 4 November 2016 and 191 Parties have
ratified the agreement. 1
There have been a number of developments since 2015, including the
publication of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special
Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related
greenhouse gas emissions pathways in 2018. 2 The IPCC noted that limiting
warming to 1.5°C is possible but would require rapid and far-reaching
transitions across multiple sectors.
In response to this a number of countries, including China and the US have set
a net zero emission target. The UK set a legally binding target of net zero
emissions by 2050 in 2019. A full list of countries which have set out legally
binding or policy commitments on net zero, and by which date are available
on the Energy and Climate Information Unit (an independent advisory body)
net zero tracker.

1

5

UNFCCC, Paris Agreement – status of ratification [accessed 24 March 2020]

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

In addition to achieving net zero by a certain date, the trajectory emissions
take, including when they peak, will also impact future climate impacts. An
August 2021 article in The Conversation highlights the fact that in order for the
1.5°C to be met, GHG emissions must peak well in advance of 2050.
The COP26 meeting was originally going to be held five years after the Paris
Agreement was agreed, in 2020. This was when the Paris Agreement came
into effect and was also the year when Parties to the Paris Agreement were
expected to put forward enhanced or updated Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDC) as part of the so-called “ratchet” mechanism. NDCs set
out each Party’s efforts to reduce national emissions and adapt to the
impacts of climate change. See section 2.2 below for further details on NDCs.
Further information on the Paris Agreement and the IPCC Special Report is
available in the Library Briefing on the Climate change conference (COP24),
Katowice, Poland.
The Commons Library climate change explainers provide further information
on the scientific basics of climate change, UK and global emission trends and
the history of global climate change negotiations.

1.2

IPCC Sixth Assessment Report published
The main function of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is
to publish scientific assessments of the global state of climate change every 7
years. Its first report was published in 1990.
The first report of its Sixth Assessment, Climate Change 2021: the physical
science basis, was published in August 2021.This covers the most up-to-date
understanding of climate change science. 3 An IPCC post on the publication
stated that changes in climate are being seen in every region and across
whole climate systems. It warned that climate change was “widespread,
rapid and intensifying” and unprecedented:
Many of the changes observed in the climate are unprecedented in
thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of years, and some of the
changes already set in motion—such as continued sea level rise—
are irreversible over hundreds to thousands of years. 4
It also highlighted that significant action could limit impacts and stabilise
temperatures:
However, strong and sustained reductions in emissions of carbon
dioxide (CO2) and other greenhouse gases would limit climate

3
4

6

IPCC Post, Climate change widespread, rapid, and intensifying – IPCC, 9 August 2021
IPCC Post, Climate change widespread, rapid, and intensifying – IPCC, 9 August 2021

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

change. While benefits for air quality would come quickly, it could
take 20-30 years to see global temperatures stabilize. 5
Two further reports are expected in the next few months. The second report is
on impacts, adaptation and vulnerability to climate change. The third report
is on mitigation of climate change. Mitigation are measures to reduce the
emissions and levels in the atmosphere of the greenhouse gases that cause
climate change.

1.3

Previous Climate Change COPs
COP25 was held in Madrid, Spain under the Presidency of Chile in December
2019. Its key aim was to finalise the “rulebook” of the Paris Agreement by
agreeing rules for carbon markets and other forms of international
cooperation. However, the talks did not reach consensus or achieve many of
the outcomes that were hoped for, instead pushing decisions into COP26 in
the UK. UN secretary general António Guterres said he was “disappointed”
with the results of COP25 and that “the international community lost an
important opportunity to show increased ambition on mitigation, adaptation
& finance to tackle the climate crisis.” 6
More information on COP25 is available in the Library Briefing Paper on the
Chile Madrid climate change conference: COP25.
For details of previous conferences please see the following Library Briefings:
•
•
•

Climate change conference (COP24), Katowice, Poland
Paris Agreement and Marrakech Climate change conference
Paris Climate change conference

Briefings on earlier conferences are also available on the Commons Library
Website,

1.4

COP26
The UK Prime Minister officially launched COP26 on 4 February 2020. 7 The
conference was scheduled to be held in Glasgow and Milan from 9-20
November 2020. However, on 1 April 2020, the UNFCCC, the UK Government
and the Italian Government announced that COP26 had been postponed due
to Covid-19. The Government press release stated:

IPCC Post, Climate change widespread, rapid, and intensifying – IPCC, 9 August 2021
CarbonBrief, COP25: Key outcomes agreed at the UN climate talks in Madrid, 15 December 2019
7
PQ 20511 [on climate change convention] 2 March 2020
5

6

7

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

Rescheduling will ensure all parties can focus on the issues to be
discussed at this vital conference and allow more time for the
necessary preparations to take place. We will continue to work with
all involved to increase climate ambition, build resilience and lower
emissions. 8
New dates of 1 to 12 November 2021 were announced jointly by the UK and
Italian Government on 28 May 2020.
According to the UK Government, COP26 will be the largest summit the UK has
ever hosted, with over 30,000 delegates, including world leaders, experts,
campaigners and government officials. Further details can be found on the
UKCOP26 website.
The Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit (ECIU). an independent advisory
body, has produced a helpful infographic on COP26: What it is, who attends
and why it matters.

8

8

BEIS, COP26 Postponement, 1 April 2020.

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

2

UK Presidency of COP26

The UK and Italy will jointly host and hold the Presidency of COP26. The
priorities for both countries were set out in joint statement in May 2021:
During this year of the UK-Italy COP Presidency, we stand together on
the need to build back better following the devastating impact of
COVID-19.
The UK and Italy are committed to putting climate and nature at the
heart of the multilateral agenda in 2021, including through the G7,
G20 and COP26 Presidencies. Through our Presidencies, we will work
closely to achieve progress on the most vital issues of our age and
encourage countries to take concrete actions towards our shared
climate goals.
We are pleased that all G7 countries have now committed to net zero
by 2050 at the latest, providing a vital step forward towards
reducing global emissions. We now urge all countries to do their part
and to take the steps needed to keep the 1.5-degree Celsius
temperature limit within reach, including through setting ambitious
nationally determined contributions and long-term strategies to cut
emissions and reach net zero. 9
The Prime Minister appointed Alok Sharma as the COP26 President designate,
alongside his position as Secretary of State for Business, Energy and
Industrial Strategy (BEIS), in February 2020. 10 The position had previously
been held by former energy and clean growth Minister, Claire O’Neill. 11 On 8
January 2021, Alok Sharma stepped down from his ministerial role and was
appointed full-time President designate.
A Written Statement from 18 March 2021 on providing an update on COP26
summarised what the role entails. It set out the work in the run up to the
Conference, including working with participants on increasing commitments
in advance of COP26:
The COP President-Designate is responsible within the UK for
delivering the COP26 summit in Glasgow. Ahead of the summit I am
engaging with the UNFCCC Secretariat and the current COP President
as they prepare the provisional negotiations agenda. I am working to
increase ambition internationally, developing effective international
Cabinet Office, Joint statement from COP26 President Alok Sharma and Italian Ecological Transition
Minister Roberto Cingolani, 11 May 2021
10
Gov.uk press release, Alok Sharma appointed COP26 President, 13 February 2020
11
Gov.uk press release, An update on the Presidency of UK COP26, 31 January 2020
9

9

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

relationships with countries, institutions, businesses and
stakeholders to achieve the necessary commitments in advance of
and at COP. I am regularly engaging with the members of the
UNFCCC to understand their positions and work with them to reach
consensus on the negotiations. I will continue my close engagement
with a large number of civil society actors as we seek to deliver an
inclusive COP. 12
The statement went onto summarise what the role of the COP President will be
during the conference, which will include leading the formal negotiations:
With the will of all Parties, I will formally become COP President
during the opening ceremony of the Glasgow Summit. At the summit,
I will participate as COP President, under the authority of the COP
and its 197 parties. I will lead the formal negotiations, preside over
meetings and will facilitate proceedings in accordance with the
COP’s draft Rules of Procedure. I will have oversight of the overall
package of outcomes and will work closely with UNFCCC members to
secure consensus. As COP President I will also lead the COP Bureau,
which is an 11-member body that assists the President and supports
the work of COP, for the duration of my term until COP27 in late
2022. 13
The role of host and president are seen as critical in the run up to COP events
in bringing together parties in advance of the meeting, and ensuring progress
is made during conferences. The ECIU explained how UK actions would be
important in advance of the conference, both nationally and internationally:
The UK has an opportunity to take a number of international actions
– on diplomacy, trade and investments ­– which could increase the
likelihood of a successful outcome at COP26. Thoughtful UK decisions
can strengthen other countries’ ability to deliver climate action; but
short-sighted decisions can undermine international action and
hinder countries’ achievement, for example, of their own NDCs.
Scrutiny of the UK actions in the run up to COP26 will be intense, with
many complex and sometimes conflicting agendas potentially
challenging the diplomatic effort. 14
The Government has set out details of domestic action to date, including its
commitment to reduce emissions by 78% by 2035 as part of meeting the sixth
carbon budget and achieving net-zero by 2050. This also included a
commitment to publishing a cross-departmental Net Zero Strategy before
COP26.

Written Statement, COP26 Update, 18 March 2021
Written Statement, COP26 Update, 18 March 2021
14
ECIU, UK diplomacy and influence ahead of COP26 [website visited 9 March 2020]
12
13

10

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

2.1

COP26 Priorities
UN Climate Change Executive Secretary Patricia Espinosa set out the four keys
to success for COP26 from the perspective of the UN in a speech on 3 February
2021, as summarised by the LSE:
The four elements that will constitute a successful outcome of the UN
Climate Conference COP26 are that:
1. Promises made to developing countries are kept, especially
the pledge by developed nations to mobilize $100 billion in
climate finance annually by 2020.
2. Governments wrap up outstanding items and negotiations to
fully implement the Paris Agreement.
3. Countries lower emissions and raise climate ambition, not
only with regard to emission reductions, but also increasing
ambition in adapting and building resilience to the impacts of
climate change.
4. No voice or solution is left behind, through re-engaging with
observers and Non-Party Stakeholders in a unity of purpose.
Ms. Espinosa said she is encouraged by the growing momentum for
climate action among both governments and non-State actors 15.
Alok Sharm, as President designate, also set out four key goals in March 2020
for the UK at COP26:
•
•
•
•

All countries to submit more ambitious Nationally Determined
Contributions, committing to further cuts in carbon emissions by 2030.
All countries to commit to reach net zero emissions as soon as possible
Developed countries to honour their commitments, including meeting the
100-billion-dollar goal for climate finance
Seeking to agree a package which takes forward the Paris Agreement. 16

Mr Sharma also highlighted the following areas as needing particular action
in the run up to the conference:
•
•
•
•

15
16

11

Adaptation and resilience to climate change.
Nature
Energy transition
Accelerating the move towards zero carbon road transport

UNFCCC, Patricia Espinosa Outlines the Four Keys to Success at COP26, 3 February 2021
Gov.uk speech, COP26 President Alok Sharma’s briefing to UN member states, published 8 March
2020

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

•

Unleashing finance to support the goals of the Paris Agreement

This was followed in June 2020 by a speech setting out the five themes that
would be the focus of the UK’s preparatory work: clean energy; clean
transport; nature-based solutions; adaptation and finance 17
The Government has set out more detail on the goals and what needs to be
achieved at the conference on the UK COP 26 website. On delivering net zero
by 2050 through NDCs it sets out that countries will need to “accelerate the
phaseout of coal, encourage investment in renewables, curtail deforestation
and speed up the switch to electric vehicles”. 18 It also calls for efforts to
protect communities and nature from the already inevitable climate change
impacts that are expected by:
•
•

Protecting and restoring ecosystems
Building defences, putting warning systems in place and making
infrastructure and agriculture more resilient to avoid loss of homes,
livelihoods and lives.

Developed countries pledged at the 2009 Copenhagen Climate Conference
pledge to mobilise at least US$100bn a year in climate finance for developing
countries (from public and private sources), by 2020. The UK has called on
developed countries to make good on this commitment (see section 2.2 below
for further details on progress), and stated that:
International financial institutions must play their part and we need
work towards unleashing the trillions in private and public sector
finance required to secure global net zero. 19
In addition, the COP26 conference “must finalise the Paris rulebook” and
accelerate collaboration between governments, business and civil society.
The Paris rulebook refers to implementation guidelines for NDCs, which have
proved difficult to agree and have not yet been finalised. 20

Priorities for the negotiations
As part of its presidency role the UK Government has engaged with other
countries on their priorities for agreement at COP26. It has set out the most
commonly raised issues, which include the following:
•

Enabling ambition through carbon markets

•

Rules for the transparent reporting of action and support

UNFCCC, COP Presidencies Speak at Launch of Race to Zero Campaign, 5 June 2020
UKCop26.org, What do we need to achieve at COP26? [website visited 19 July 2021]
19
UKCop26.org, What do we need to achieve at COP26? [website visited 19 July 2021]
20
UKCop26.org, What do we need to achieve at COP26? [website visited 19 July 2021]
17

18

12

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

•

Common timeframes for emission reduction commitments

•

Enabling enhanced adaptation action

•

Averting, minimising and addressing loss and damage

•

Means of implementation, including the initiation of
deliberations on a new goal for global climate finance after
2025

•

Responding to the latest science and the ambition of current
emission reduction targets

•

Promoting fair, inclusive climate action. 21

Further detail on the above issues were provided in a letter to all parties of
the UNFCCC from Alok Sharma on 12 April 2021 in advance of the June 2021
annual pre-COP meeting that takes place, usually in Bonn but this year held
virtually.

Preparatory work
Historically, reaching agreement at climate change COPs has required a
significant amount of work before the conferences begin to reach a degree of
consensus amongst all parties on the proposed text for any agreement.
The UNFCC Road to Glasgow website sets out the range of meetings that have
been taking place, for the most part remotely, to work on the various topics.
There are also monthly multilateral informal consultations by the COP25
Presidency and the COP26 incoming Presidency, at ministerial, country
delegation and technical levels. Summaries of each of these meetings are
available on the UNFCC website.
Alok Sharma set out the work he was involved with as part of this process in a
debate on COP26 in the House of Commons on 10 March 2021:
I, of course, am now working full time on COP26. I have personally
engaged with Ministers in more than 50 Governments, including
recently with India’s Prime Minister Modi, US special envoy John
Kerry, who was here on Monday for discussions with us, and China’s
special envoy for climate change, Minister Xie Zhenhua.
Of course, we will work with like-minded colleagues around the
world to deliver at Glasgow. I speak regularly with negotiating group
chairs and chief negotiators, the United Nations, development
banks, civil society groups and business. In recent weeks, I have also
made a number of international visits, where I have always felt well

21

13

UKCop26, Negotiations [website visited 21 July 2021]

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

supported by the UK Government network. All in all, we are well
resourced for COP. 22
Alok Sharma also gave evidence to the Environmental Audit Committee on 11
March 2021, where he provided further detail on work to agree a Paris
rulebook:
The issue, as you have quite rightly identified, is what we are doing—
apart from asking for these commitments on mitigation and
adaptation and so on—to close off the elements of the Paris
rulebook. We are talking about negotiations across 197 countries.
We have a negotiating team, which is working day and night on this
issue. From a time zone perspective, they are literally working day
and night on this issue. I have a regular dialogue with the chairs of
the negotiating groups that are part of the UNFCCC process. We are
looking to make headway through the various mandates we have
been given. One issue we have is that we are not able to meet in
person in the same way that would have been possible previously.
We are looking to see how those discussions move forward in a
virtual or hybrid setting. There is this idea that, somehow, we are
sitting on our hands and that the process of discussing the issues is
not happening. It most certainly is. 23
Details of the various meetings and bilateral discussions being held by the
Alok Sharma are available on the COP26 pages. These include, for example,
recent bilateral discussions during visits to Austria, Barbados, Turkey and
Russia, and plans to visit Slovenia and Italy in advance of the G20 Climate
and Energy Minister’s meeting. In addition, there are a series of international
meetings and events that have taken place over the last year and that are
due take place in advance of the meeting in Glasgow and feed into the
discussions there.
A Presidency Programme for COP26 setting out the programme for November
was published on 7 July 2021 and is available on the UKCOP26 website.

2.2

Progress to date
In a written statement from 18 March 2021 Alok Sharma provided a summary
of progress in the efforts to reach agreement on the four goals he set out for
the Conference:

Reducing emissions: countries representing around 65% of global
CO2 emissions and around 70% of the world’s economy have now
committed to reaching net zero emissions or carbon neutrality. When
the UK took the role of incoming COP Presidency in December 2019,

22
23

14

HC Deb 10 March 2021 c932
Environmental Audit Committee, Oral evidence: Preparation for COP26, HC 222, 11 March 2021

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

coverage was just 20% of global emissions and 26% of world GDP.
On 12th December, over 90 countries, businesses, sectors, cities,
including 75 world leaders, attended the Climate Ambition Summit,
co-hosted with the UN and France in partnership with Italy and Chile.
At the summit 45 leaders highlighted plans for new and more
ambitious NDCs (covering 71 countries including all EU member
states) and 24 countries announced new commitments, strategies or
plans to reach net zero or carbon neutrality. The Summit delivered
real steps forward - for example Colombia committed to an
impressive 51% emissions reduction target; and Pakistan announced
a moratorium on new coal plants.

On helping protect communities and natural habitats from the
impact of climate change: at the CAS, 20 countries put forward

plans for protecting their economies and communities from the
impact of climate change. On 25 January we launched the
Adaptation Action Coalition to bring together countries to identify
the solutions, technologies and resources needed to protect people
and nature as the planet warms. Action on nature is at the heart of
our COP Presidency. At the UN General Assembly in September 2020
the Prime Minister signed the Leaders’ Pledge for Nature committing
leaders to take ten urgent actions to put nature on a path to
recovery by 2030. The UK played a key role in pioneering and
negotiating the Pledge, and which now has over 80 countries signed
up. On 2 February 2021 we launched the Forest, Agriculture and
Commodity Trade (FACT) Dialogue, which will bring together key
countries exporting agricultural products and the countries
consuming these products to agree global principles and a roadmap
of actions to make global supply chains process greener and more
sustainable, tackling one of the primary drivers of nature loss.

On increasing climate finance: there is an urgent need to get more

finance flowing to support swift climate action. Developed countries
must meet and surpass the $100bn of climate finance commitment,
matching UK ambition to double UK ICF to at least £11.6 billion
between 2021 and 2025. Private finance is also key. So far we have
seen major asset owners, representing over $5 trillion, and asset
managers, representing over $9 trillion, commit to net zero targets
by 2050. Climate-related Financial Disclosures are increasing and
jurisdictions in Brazil, New Zealand, Hong Kong and Switzerland are
taking action to make disclosure mandatory, complementing the
UK’s announcement for a pathway to mandatory disclosure across
the economy by 2025.

On making progress on the outstanding elements of the Paris
Rulebook, and accelerating delivery of the Paris Goals: we have

been convening UNFCCC members in discussions to lay the
groundwork for the negotiations, and we will be hosting, alongside
Chile, a series of monthly multilateral consultations. More broadly,
we have built partnerships to increase international collaboration on

15

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

key issues, establishing the Energy Transition Council and Zero
Emissions Vehicles Transition Council, as well as working through
existing coalitions: the Powering Past Coal Alliance has grown to 114
members covering 20% of OECD coal power capacity. 24
Since then, a Climate and Development Ministerial was held on 31 March 2021.
This covered access to finance, together with the quantity, quality and
composition of any finance; the response to climate impacts; and the impact
of Covid-19 on finance and debt sustainability. There is also an agreed
Climate and Development Ministerial pathway setting out future discussions.
An annual (intersessional) meeting of the UNFCCC normally takes place in
Bonn in June, halfway between two COPs. This year it took place between 31
May and 17 June, as a virtual meeting on an informal basis. The UNFCC
summarised the issues covered during the meeting:
Issues discussed in preparation for COP26 included making
agriculture more sustainable, how best to take stock of progress of
climate actions, fulfilling pre-2020 commitments, support to
developing countries, and building resilience and adapting to the
effects of climate change.
There are still diverging views on finalizing the details of how the
Paris Agreement’s carbon market and non-market mechanisms will
work. While diverging views also remain on finalizing the details that
will allow all countries to communicate their climate actions
transparently under the Paris Agreement, progress was made on the
tools needed to bring the transparency arrangements to life.
Other crunch issues that need to be resolved at COP26 include
delivering the pledge to mobilize 100 billion dollars annually to
support developing countries, raising ambition on emission
reductions, adaptation and finance while ensuring that no voice
remains unheard and no proposal unattended. 25
However, specialist website CarbonBrief produced a summary of the meeting
concluding that “discussions were marred by technical difficulties and made
little progress on most of the key issues, with an unmet $100bn pledge on
climate finance looming over the talks”. 26
A COP Ministerial meeting took place at the end of July with an agenda
covering five topics: scaling up adaptation; keeping 1.5°C alive; loss and
damage; finalising the Paris Rulebook; and mobilising finance.27 A summary
of the meeting was published and provides a good overview of the range of
views on what commitments should be made at COP26.

Written Statement: COP26 Update, 18 March 2021
UNFCCC< Progress Made as May-June UN Climate Change Session Closes, 17 June 2021
26
Carbon Brief, UN Climate Talks: Key outcomes form the June 2021 virtual conference. 18 June 2021
27
Cabinet Office, July Ministerial Chair's Summary, 5 August 2021
24
25

16

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

Nationally Determined Contributions
The Paris Agreement requires each Party to prepare, communicate and
maintain successive (every five years) nationally determined contributions
(NDCs) that it intends to achieve. 28 NDCs set out each Party’s efforts to reduce
national emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate change. Further
information is available on the UNFCCC pages on nationally determined
contributions.
NDCs were first submitted by Parties in 2015. To date 190 of 196 parties to the
Convention, including the EU Member States, have submitted their first NDCs.
Parties were expected to put forward enhanced or updated NDCs in 2020.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
published an initial NDC Synthesis Report on Friday 26 February 2021. The
report provides an overview of the 48 new or updated NDCs representing 75
Parties, submitted by 31 December 2020. A final version of the report is
expected to be published before COP26.
The report concluded that the sum of NDC submitted would mean that by
2030 global greenhouse gas emissions would be 0.7 per cent lower than in
1990, 0.5 per cent lower than in 2010 and 2.1 per cent lower than in 2017.
However, it noted this was not anything near enough to achieve the long-term
target of net zero emissions by 2050:
[…] to be consistent with global emission pathways with no or
limited overshoot of the 1.5 °C goal, global net anthropogenic CO2
emissions need to decline by about 45 per cent from the 2010 level by
2030, reaching net zero around 2050. For limiting global warming to
below 2 °C, CO emissions need to decrease by about 25 per cent from
the 2010 level by 2030 and reach net zero around 2070. Deep
reductions are required for nonCO2 emissions as well.
Thus, the estimated reductions referred to in paragraphs […] above
fall far short of what is required, demonstrating the need for Parties
to further strengthen their mitigation commitments under the Paris
Agreement. 29
CarbonBrief produced an analysis of which countries met the UN’s 2020
deadline to raise ‘climate ambition’, examining NDCs of the 45 “parties” (44
countries, plus the EU’s 27 member states viewed as one bloc) that met this
deadline. It noted that although some parties such as the UK and EU, have
increased ambitions, many others restated existing ambitions and, in some
cases, ambitions were decreased. 30

Article 4, para 2
UNFCC, Nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement, 26 February 2021
30
CarbonBrief, Which countries met the UN’s 2020 deadline to raise ‘climate ambition’, 8 January 2021
28

29

17

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

UK NDC
The UK is a party to the UNFCCC and has ratified the Paris Agreement
separately to the EU. However, until 2020 the EU had an overall NDC on
behalf of its Members States, including the UK, acting jointly to deliver an
overarching commitment. The UK Government confirmed in February 2020
plans to bring “forward its own, increased NDC well ahead of COP26”
following the UK’s departure from the EU. 31
The UK’s independent adviser on climate change, the Climate Change
Committee (CCC) published its advice to Government on setting NDC’s on 3
December 2020. Its key recommendations included setting a target for
reducing UK territorial emissions by at least 68% by 2030. However, the CCC
cautioned this would not be enough and called for a policy package and a
Net Zero strategy for the UK:
The NDC is more than just a number. It should be
accompanied by wider climate commitments, including the
development of a policy package and Net Zero Strategy to
deliver against the UK goal, clear commitments to reduce
international aviation and shipping emissions, and greater
support for climate finance, particularly for developing
countries. It is also imperative that the NDC is accompanied
by strengthened climate change adaptation plans – with new
commitments – for the UK to show its leadership on emissions
reduction and adaptation. 32
The Government followed this by announcing on 4 December 2020 that it had
increased the UK ambition in its NDC of cutting emissions from 53% to 68% by
2030, compared to 1990 levels. Details were set out in a Written Statement on
7 December:
On Friday 4 December the Prime Minister announced the UK’s new
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris
Agreement. This commits the UK to a new ambitious target to reduce
the UK’s emissions by at least 68% by the end of the decade,
compared to 1990 levels.
This is a step forward in our ambition to tackle climate change over
the next ten years as we accelerate towards meeting our legallybinding commitment to reach net zero by 2050. Just as the UK led
the way as the first major economy to legislate for net zero, our NDC
raises the bar for global climate ambition by committing the UK to
the highest level of emissions reductions by 2030 of any major
economy, compared to 1990 levels. The level of the UK’s NDC is
consistent with advice from the independent Climate Change
Committee (CCC). It is a significant step up from the level of the UK’s
previous target as a contributor to the EU’s NDC, which was
31
32

18

PQ 12820 [on climate change] 14 February 2020
CCC, Advice on the UK’s 2030 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 3 December 2020

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

equivalent to around a 53% UK reduction over the same time
period. 33
Full details of the UK’s NDC can be found in its official submission to the
UNFCCC.
In the lead up to the conference there were calls form some developing
countries for the G20 countries, meeting in Italy on 12 October, to strengthen
their targets on cutting greenhouse gas emissions and provisions on climate
finance 34.
In advance of the G20 meeting, Alok Sharma also called for China, India and
Saudi Arabia, together with Australia, to strengthen their NDCs. He stated it
was incumbent on them to deliver enhanced and more ambitious climate
targets before COP26. 35

Climate Finance
In 2009, at the fifteenth conference of the parties (COP15 ) of the UN Climate
Change Conference (UNFCCC) in Copenhagen climate finance funding of $100
billion a year by 2020 was agreed.
Climate finance would be delivered by Annex I countries of the UNFCCC
agreement non-Annex I countries. The finance is to fund climate change
mitigation, which are measures to reduce greenhouse emissions, and
adaptation to climate change. Funding can come from public and private
sources and be provided in different forms. The $100bn commitments were
reiterated at COP 16 in Cancun in 2010, and at COP21 in Paris in 2015, where it
was agreed to extend the commitment to provide $100bn every year to 2025.
Final figures will not be available until 2022 but it is generally accepted that
the 2020 goal has not been fully be met This, together with what form climate
finance takes (loans or grants), is a key area of contention for developing
countries in the run up to COP26.
The variety of the sources of this funding have made it difficult to monitor
progress, but a review commissioned by the UN concluded in December 2020
that target will be missed. An article in Nature Climate Change expressed the
view that “if this failure is confirmed, it will likely lead to [a] further erosion of
trust between developed and developing countries”. 36
Ensuring the $100bn pledge is met going forward is one of the four goals of
the UK’s COP26 presidency. Alok Sharma, has said that although $100bn is

Written Statement, The UK’s new Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), 7 December 2020
The Observer, Give us action on climate not just words, say developing nations ahead of Cop26, 9
October 2021
35
Financial Times, UK COP chief challenges G20 climate laggards over failure to improve, 11 October
2021 [subscription required]
36
Nature Climate Change, Rebooting a failed promise of climate finance, 18 February 2021
33

34

19

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

just a fraction of the investment needed to tackle the climate crisis, delivering
it is a matter of maintaining trust.
In 2019, The UK increased its commitment to £11.6bn in the next four years. In
recent months the US, Germany and Canada have also increased their
pledges. Recent reports are that total pledges are currently $10bn short of
the target, but that countries such as Sweden, Norway and Spain are
expected to increase their contributions.
Private finance
The former Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, was appointed as
the Finance Adviser to the Prime Minister for COP26 and UN Special Envoy for
Climate Action and Finance on 16 January 2020. 37
Further details of work in this area in the run up to COP26 are set out in
Building a private finance system for net zero: Priorities for private finance for
COP26 published by Mark Carney in November 2020. In addition, the Glasgow
Financial Alliance for Net Zero was launched in April 2021, chaired by Mark
Carney with the aim of accelerating the transition to net-zero:
The Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ), chaired by
Mark Carney, UN Special Envoy on Climate Action and Finance,
brings together over 160 firms (together responsible for assets in
excess of $70 trillion1) from the leading net zero initiatives across the
financial system to accelerate the transition to net zero emissions by
2050 at the latest.
All GFANZ member alliances must be accredited by the UN Race to
Zero campaign. They must use science-based guidelines to reach net
zero emissions, cover all emission scopes, include 2030 interim
target setting, and commit to transparent reporting and accounting
in line with the UN Race to Zero criteria.
43 banks from 23 countries (with assets of $28.5 trillion) form the
Net-Zero Banking Alliance (NZBA) today - which joins GFANZ - with
its members committing to align operational and attributable
emissions from their portfolios with pathways to net-zero by 2050 or
sooner. 38
More recently Alok Sharma gave a speech on 11 July 2021 at the Venice G20
Climate Conference, organised by the Italian finance ministry and central
bank. The speech focused on the role of Multilateral Development Banks
(MDBs) in delivering climate finance, including scaling up private finance:
I urge MDBs and private financial firms to increase their
collaboration, and scale-up blended finance initiatives and technical

Bank of England, Mark Carney appointed by Prime Minister as finance adviser for COP26, 16 January
2020 [accessed 23 March 2020]
38
UNFCCC, New Financial Alliance for Net Zero Emissions Launches, 21 April 2021
37

20

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

assistance, and to improve the conditions for investment within
countries, and build pipelines of high-quality, bankable projects.
Together, you can demonstrate that public finance can de-risk
investment and leverage in significant private capital.
So, ahead of COP, I encourage MDBs to share plans for mobilising
private finance faster, and I urge private financial institutions to
work with MDBs on these plans, to help show how finance will flow in
support of countries’ ambitious plans for climate action.
Such steps are essential if we are to redirect the sums flowing
through the global economy towards our green future, and secure
the trillions of dollars required to build resilience, meet global net
zero, and keep the 1.5 degree limit alive. 39

Least Developed Countries view
Finance is one of the areas of contention between developed and developing
countries. Developing countries are concerned that they will be asked to
commit to costly measures to address climate change, when their historic
emissions are low; and that they are likely to suffer more severe impacts from
climate change without the finance available to adapt to them. A meeting of
the UNFCCC grouping of Least Developed Countries (LDCs) held in advance of
COP22 (in July 2021) published Delivering the Paris Agreement: a five point
plan for solidarity, fairness and prosperity which called for much stronger
action from developed countries:
We lay out five areas in which all governments, especially those of
nations that became prosperous through the untrammelled burning
of fossil fuels, need to deliver on their promises before and during
COP26:
Cutting emissions: despite welcome recent progress, the sum total
of climate policies in place across the world will not keep global
warming within the limits that governments agreed in Paris; an
acceleration that is consistent with the 1.5 degree Celsius
temperature limit is urgently needed, led by those with the biggest
responsibility and capacity
Adaptation: with climate impacts increasing, provisions to help the
most vulnerable adapt, including through increased financial
support, need to be strengthened
Loss and Damage: the consequences of the developed world’s
historical failure to cut their emissions adequately are already
resulting in losses and damage for the most vulnerable.

39

21

Cabinet Office, Moving finance towards our clean, green, and resilient future, 11 July 2021

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

Responsibilities have to be acknowledged and promised measures
delivered
Finance: The promises made in Copenhagen in 2009 and again in
the Paris Agreement are unequivocal, and must be delivered: at
least $100bn per year by 2020, up to 2024, with a concrete delivery
plan, with at least half going to adaptation, with increased annual
sums from 2025. The debt consequences of Covid-19 mean that
action outside the UN climate process is also essential
Implementation: After several summits of stalling, governments
must by COP26 finalise rules on transparency, carbon trading and
common timeframes for accelerating action, in a way that
safeguards development and nature. 40

2.3

Emerging elements for the negotiations
Alok Sharma wrote a letter to all parties on 22 September 2021 in which he set
out the remaining discussion that would take place in advance of COP26. The
letter also set out the “emerging elements of the COP26 negotiated outcome”.
The list covered a number of areas including:
•

•

•
•

On finance achieving the $100bn climate finance target; and agreeing a
framework for climate finance beyond 2025. In addition, reviewing and
issuing guidance to multilateral agencies on funding provision.
Addressing the gaps on NDCs, including how to strengthen NDCs for
2030, through the global stocktake of NDCs that is due to take place in
2023. In addition, agreement on a common timeframe for signatories to
produce the NDCs. Work on further commitments from countries to netzero are also highlighted.
Continue to work to prioritise adaptation and increase the focus on loss
and damage
Further work on the Paris Rulebook and an enhanced transparency
framework, to give confidence in climate commitments and allow
comparisons. 41

The full list is available on the UK COP26 website.
In a speech to the UN General Assembly on 22 September 2021 the Prime
Minister, Boris Johnson, called COP26 a turning point for humanity, which
needs to “grow up” and listen to the warnings of scientists. He stated that
LDCs, Delivering the Paris Agreement: a five-point plan for solidarity, fairness and prosperity July
2021
41
Alok Sharma, Letter to all parties from the cop26 president designate, ahead of pre-cop, 22
September 2021
40

22

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

COP26: the international climate change conference, Glasgow, UK

countries “need to pledge collectively to achieve carbon neutrality – net
zero”. He also highlighted the four areas where commitments needed to be
made:
If we are to stave off these hikes in temperature we must go further
and faster – we need all countries to step up and commit to very
substantial reductions by 2030 – and I passionately believe that we
can do it by making commitments in four areas – coal, cars, cash
and trees. 42
Alok Sharma also gave a speech on 30 September to the Youth4Climate
conference which took place during the Ministerial pre-COP meeting in Milan,
in which he said that the youth delegates spoke the truth “we need to do
much, much more much faster. 43

42
43

23

Prime Minister’s Office, PM speech at the UN General Assembly, 22 September 2021
Alok Sharma, Home truths on climate delivered ahead of COP26, 30 September 2021

Commons Library Research Briefing, 12 October 2021

The House of Commons Library is a research and
information service based in the UK Parliament.
Our impartial analysis, statistical research and
resources help MPs and their staff scrutinise
legislation, develop policy, and support constituents.
Our published material is available to everyone
on commonslibrary.parliament.uk.
Get our latest research delivered straight to your inbox.
Subscribe at commonslibrary.parliament.uk/subscribe
or scan the code below:

commonslibrary.parliament.uk
@commonslibrary

