BRIEFING PAPER
Number 9212, 4 May 2021

The UK Emissions Trading
Scheme

By Elena Ares

Contents
1.

The UK in the EU ETS

2

2.

Options for carbon pricing after Brexit

3

3.
3.1

The UK ETS
Decision to implement a UK ETS
Energy White Paper
Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy
Commentary
Judicial review of UK ETS cap

4
4
5
6
7
7

4.

UK ETS implementation
Free allocation review

8
9

5.

Linking to the EU ETS

9

The Four administrations announced in June 2020 that they would be introducing a UK
Emissions Trading Scheme (UK ETS) to replace the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS)
after the UK left the EU. This was following a consultation and recommendations from the
Climate Change Committee.
The UK government and the devolved administrations collectively constitute the UK ETS
Authority to oversee the UK ETS. 1 The UK ETS, a cap and trade emissions scheme, is of
similar design and has similar aims to the EU ETS. However, it will have a 5% reduction in
the emissions cap that would have been set under that scheme. In addition, the aim is to
align it with the UK 2050 net zero target by 2024 at the latest. Further details of the UK
ETS were provided in the Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy published in March 2021.
The Government also announced the first auction of allowances would take place in May
2021.
The UK and EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement committed both parties to explore
options for linking their schemes but does not go further.

1

Gov.uk, Participating in the UK ETS [website visited 4 May 2021]

www.parliament.uk/commons-library | intranet.parliament.uk/commons-library | papers@parliament.uk | @commonslibrary

2

The UK Emissions Trading Scheme

1. The UK in the EU ETS
The EU ETS is the largest multi-country, multi-sector greenhouse gas emissions trading
system in the world covering more than 11,000 power stations and industrial plants across
EU Member states. Around 1,000 of those were in the UK until it left the EU and the EU
ETS on 31 December 2020, after the end of the Brexit transition period. 2
The EU ETS is a mandatory emissions cap-and-trade scheme. It sets an EU-wide cap on the
total amount of greenhouse gas emissions from energy intensive sectors including power
stations and industrial plants. The cap decreases over time to reduce overall emissions. 3
The EU ETS now also includes airlines operating between countries covered byt the EU
ETS, via a separate cap. Approximately 140 UK-administered aircraft operators take part in
the EU ETS. 4
The EU ETS was launched in 2005 and has since undergone a number of reforms. Under
the scheme, companies either receive EU allowances (EUAs) free or purchase them during
auctions of allowances issued by Governments. 5 Surplus allowances can also be traded on
the open carbon market. The number of allowances held by any company that falls under
the scheme at the end of an EU ETS year must be equal to, or more than, the total volume
of its emissions, or they are fined. 6
As a result of the low allowance prices the EU introduced several measures over time to
reduce allowances, including removing surplus allowances from the market. The UK also
responded to the issue of the low cost of EUAs by introducing the Carbon Price Floor (or
CPF) in 2013. This was a UK-only carbon tax which supplemented the price of EUAs. The
CPF increased the price of carbon for UK participants, by setting a minimum price, and
helped to drive coal almost completely out of the UK energy mix. 7 Revenue from both the
EU ETS auctions and the CPF were retained by HM Treasury. There is no equivalent EUwide floor price for EUA auctions.
In Phase III (2013-2020), power stations purchased all their allowances whereas other
industries still received some of their EUAs via free allocation. Both sectors were also able
to buy international credits from emission-saving projects around the world. 8
The UK participated until the end of Phase III, which aimed for an overall emissions
reduction of 21% compared to 2005 emissions for power stations and industrial plants.
Phase IV of the EU ETS runs from 2021-2030, without UK participation. Under this,
sectors covered by the EU ETS are required to reduce their emissions by 43% compared to
2005 levels. To increase emissions cuts, the overall number of emission allowances will be
reduced by 2.2% a year from 2021 onwards, compared to the previous 1.74% annual
reduction. The amount of surplus allowances that will be held in reserve will also be
significantly reduced after 2023.

2

3
4
5

6
7

8

The greenhouse gases covered by EU ETS are carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O) and
perfluorocarbons (PFCs).
European Commission, Climate Action, ‘Emissions cap and allowances’, [accessed: 4 May 2021]
Gov.uk, Meeting climate change requirements if there’s no Brexit deal, 12 October 2018
Each allowance gives the holder the right to emit one tonne of carbon dioxide or the equivalent of nitrous
oxide and perfluorocarbons.
European Commission, Climate Action, ‘The EU Trading System (EU ETS)’, [accessed: 4 May 2021]
BEIS, Coal Generation In Great Britain The pathway to a low-carbon future: consultation document,
November 2016
European Commission, Climate Action, ‘Free allocation’, [accessed: 4 May 2021]

3

Commons Library Briefing, 4 May 2021

Further details of how the EU ETS works can be found on the EU Commission page and
BEIS page on the EU ETS. Carbon Brief has also published a detailed Q&A on the EU ETS.

2. Options for carbon pricing after Brexit
The Climate Change Committee (CCC) published a letter to Government in August 2019
following a request from the Government on its recommendations for the approach to
carbon pricing after Brexit. It made three key recommendations:
1.

The Government should not rely on carbon pricing alone. Whilst carbon pricing
is essential it needs to be used as part of a suite of policy instruments, as
confirmed by real-world experience internationally.

2.

We agree with the Government’s preference for a linked UK-EU ETS in the case
of EU exit. Should a linked scheme prove not to be possible, we will offer
further recommendations.

3.

We recommend that the cap of the linked UK ETS be set based on the costeffective path to the UK’s new net-zero target. We will provide that trajectory
in our advice on the sixth carbon budget (covering 2033-2037), which is due in
2020. 9

The CCC examined three options: a linked scheme, a standalone scheme and a carbon
tax. The Annex to the letter set out its views on all of these and of continuing in the EU
ETS:
•

Linking a UK ETS to the EU ETS is the Government’s current preference for a
scheme:

This would offer access to a liquid market in emissions allowances, incentivising
decarbonisation at lowest cost across Europe. The EU’s Market Stability Reserve is
likely to enable price visibility. Additionally, if there were common emissions trading
arrangements with a large (and geographically close) trading partner this would
reduce the risk of carbon leakage.
However, unless and until the EU adopts a net-zero target and amends the EU ETS,
the scheme is less aligned to the UK’s net-zero target, implying a greater role for
supplementary policies in the UK. Additionally, under this scheme it is likely that the
UK will need to mirror the EU ETS scheme as closely as possible. Therefore there may
be limited room for expanding the sectoral coverage of any scheme in the near term,
and the UK may have limited input on governance arrangements.
•

In case a linking agreement with the EU cannot be reached, a standalone UK
ETS could be an option:

A standalone UK ETS may offer more policy autonomy than a linked ETS, and the
opportunity to align the scheme more directly to the UK’s current emissions, net-zero
ambition and directly to carbon budgets.
However, the scheme risks low liquidity in the long-term unless sectoral coverage is
expanded. The system would require robust rules and governance around price or
quantity of permits to ensure that a sensible price prevails, particularly given likely
volatility in the early years of a new scheme. Furthermore, expansion of a UK scheme
could impact the possibility of securing linking agreements to other schemes, as
experience suggests linking of differentiated schemes can be a complex and lengthy
process.
•Implementation of a UK carbon tax is the Government’s fall back position in the
case of leaving the EU without a deal:
‒ A carbon tax offers less complexity than trading schemes, and lower administrative
costs potentially expanding the range of actors and sectors to which it can be applied
9

CCC, Annex to the Letter to the Government on the Future of Carbon Pricing, 7 August 2019

4

The UK Emissions Trading Scheme

in the near-term. A strong and rising tax that offers stability and visibility will give
greater price certainty than an emissions trading scheme, though less certainty over
the quantity of emissions.
‒ However, experience with the Carbon Price Support and Fuel Duty Escalator
suggests that effective governance arrangements around a carbon tax would be
required in order to ensure price visibility. Additionally, as taxes do not set a limit on
quantity, a greater role may be required of other policy instruments if a tax under
delivers.
•Remaining a member of the EU ETS would maintain current arrangements.
We agree with the Government’s preference for a linked UK-EU ETS in the case of UK
exit. This maintains key benefits of membership of the EU scheme, most notably
access to a wider market and addressing competitiveness issues by maintaining a level
playing field across the EU. 10

In addition to its recommendation to Government, the CCC also published a report by
VIVID economics on the Future of Carbon Pricing in the UK which provides more detailed
analysis of each option.

3. The UK ETS
Throughout the Brexit negotiations both the UK and EU had expressed a preference for a
linked ETS (for further details of the negotiations and how they addressed climate change
more broadly see the Commons Briefing Paper Brexit: Energy and Climate Change) .
The Government considered the options of a carbon tax or a UK ETS scheme after the
transition ends. As part of this, in May 2019, the UK Government and the devolved
Administrations launched a consultation on The future of UK carbon pricing. 11 The
consultation set out a number of options. It also identified the establishment of a UK
national emissions trading system (UK ETS) linked to the EU ETS following the end of
Phase III as the preferred option of the UK Government and the devolved Administrations.
This was also the CCC’s preferred option, as set out above.

3.1 Decision to implement a UK ETS
The consultation was followed by an announcement by the four Administrations on 1
June 2020, in the consultation response, that Administrations would establish a UK ETS
and be open to a link with the EU ETS:
We intend to establish a UK Emissions Trading System with Phase I running from
2021- 2030, which could operate as either a linked or standalone system. As stated in
‘The UK’s Approach to Negotiations’ the UK would be open to considering a link
between any future UK Emissions Trading System (ETS) and the EU ETS (as Switzerland
has done with its ETS), if it suited both sides’ interests. As announced at Budget 2020,
the UK Government will publish a consultation later this year on the design of a
Carbon Emission Tax as an alternative to a UK ETS, to ensure a carbon price remains
in place in all scenarios. 12

The consultation response also set out the Government’s intention to set a 5% tighter cap
for UK emissions than was set out in Phase IV of the EU ETS:

10
11
12

CCC, Annex to the Letter to the Government on the Future of Carbon Pricing, 7 August 2019,
Gov.uk consultation, The future of UK carbon pricing, 21 May 2019
The future of UK carbon pricing UK: Government and Devolved Administrations’ response, June 2020

5

Commons Library Briefing, 4 May 2021

In light of the UK’s commitment to reaching net-zero emissions by 2050, the UK ETS
will show greater climate ambition from the start. As such, the cap will initially be set
5% below the UK’s notional share of the EU ETS cap for Phase IV of the EU ETS. 13

Unlike the EU ETS, the Government proposed setting an auction reserve price for the UK
ETS. This would be £15 “to ensure a minimum level of ambition and price continuity”.
This was increased to £22 when the scheme was launched (see section 4 below). 14 In
addition, international credits would “not be permitted at this time”. 15
An Impact Assessment covering the UK ETS operation from 2021-2024 was published by
BEIS, alongside the consultation response in June 2020. 16
The main conclusions of the assessment for introducing a UK ETS, as opposed to
remaining in the EU ETS, were of an overall benefit to society, higher revenue to
Government, and potentially higher costs to business (although with a wide range of
variables that could affect this):
122. Overall, the analysis in this IA suggests that a standalone UK ETS design, as set
out in the government response, could deliver a net benefit to society in its initial
years, compared with the counterfactual of staying in the EU ETS. The analysis
suggests a positive net present value (NPV) to society.
123. The main benefits of the UK ETS scenario, compared with the counterfactual, are
the higher carbon benefit of additional abatement and the higher revenue that the
government will receive due to higher expected carbon values (partly offset by lower
estimated number of allowances purchased). There are also non-monetised benefits,
such as an improvement in air quality and switching to a less carbon-intensive energy
supply.
124. The main costs of the UK ETS scenario, compared with the counterfactual, are
the additional admin costs for the government in setting up the UK ETS and one-off
cost to businesses of complying with the new scheme, and additional costs to system
participants due to them facing higher expected carbon values under the UK ETS
scenario.
125. Our analysis shows that, despite an overall benefit to society of reduced
emissions, the costs to businesses of delivering these emissions reductions are higher
in the UK ETS scenario than the counterfactual. 17

However, these conclusions were caveated with the warning that “the analysis are largely
driven by our assumptions for how UK participants will behave in the early years, over
which there is significant uncertainty”. 18 The net cost to business was estimated to be
between £5m to £11m a year, in 2019 prices.
The Government implemented the necessary legislation for the creation of a UK ETS
through regulation in the Finance Act 2020 . The Greenhouse Gas Emissions Trading
Scheme Order 2020 was made on 11 November 2020.

Energy White Paper
The Government published the Energy White Paper: Powering our Net Zero future on 14
December 2020, confirming the decision to go forward with a UK ETS scheme. The paper
set out proposals that go further than EU ETS scheme, with the UK ETS scheme expanding
13
14
15
16

17
18

The future of UK carbon pricing UK: Government and Devolved Administrations’ response, June 2020
The existing carbon floor price within the EU ETS was set as £18.08 until 2021
The future of UK carbon pricing UK: Government and Devolved Administrations’ response, June 2020
The assessment considers the initial years of the UK ETS, based on the design set out in the government
response: a cap on emissions set based on a 5% reduction on our notional share of the EU ETS, free
allocation based on our notional share of the EU ETS, and a transitional auction reserve price starting at
£15 per allowance.
BEIS, The Future of UK Carbon Pricing Impact Assessment, 1 June 2020
BEIS, The Future of UK Carbon Pricing Impact Assessment, 1 June 2020

6

The UK Emissions Trading Scheme

to cover wider parts of the economy and aiming for net-zero emissions, as part of
reaching the UK’s net zero target for 2050. The accompanying Written Statement
summarised the Government’s approach as follows:
To support businesses to decarbonise the Government is today confirming a new and
ambitious UK Emissions Trading Scheme (UK ETS), will be in place from 1 January
2021. This new UK carbon market will be the foundation on which the UK achieves
net zero emissions cost effectively.
The scheme has been designed by the UK Government jointly with the Scottish
Government, Welsh Government and Northern Ireland Executive and is a crucial step
towards net zero, and will bring benefits for business, trade, and innovation.
The UK ETS will replace the UK’s participation in the EU Emissions Trading System (EU
ETS) and will be a market-based measure which will provide continuity for
participants. The UK ETS will initially apply to power stations, energy-intensive
industries, and aviation.
Our UK ETS is more ambitious than the EU system it replaces - from day one the cap
on emissions allowed within the scheme will be reduced by 5 per cent, and we will
consult in due course on aligning it with net zero.
The UK ETS will also allow us to expand carbon pricing across the economy and
encourage innovation in emerging decarbonisation technologies. We have committed
to exploring expanding the UK ETS to the two thirds of uncovered emissions, and will
set out our aspirations to continue to lead the world on carbon pricing in the run up
to COP26. This will also include how the UK ETS could incentivise the deployment of
greenhouse gas removal technologies. In addition to this, the UK is open to linking
the UK ETS internationally in principle and we are considering a range of options, but
no decision on our preferred linking partners has yet been made. 19

Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy
The Government published its Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy on 17 March 2021. The
summary set out the role the UK ETS would play in the UK achieving its 2050 Net Zero
target:
An ambitious UK Emissions Trading Scheme (UK ETS) cap will send a clear signal to
the market that this government is committed to reaching net zero. While risks
associated with low carbon investments remain high, or if the carbon price is low,
targeted government funding mechanisms will pull through investment from the
private sector for the deployment of technologies. A reformed approach to mitigating
carbon leakage, adapting over time to reflect a tighter ETS cap alongside increased
deployment of low carbon technologies, will ensure our global and domestic climate
goals are met, while supporting the growth of low carbon manufacturing in the UK 20

The Strategy also set out further details on the intention to align the EU ETS with the Net
Zero target by 2024, and how the scheme will fit in with other UK carbon pricing
mechanisms; together with plans to examine options on expanding it to cover further
sectors:
Action 2.1: Use carbon pricing as a tool to send a clear market signal,
providing certainty over our net zero ambition for industrial sectors
Carbon pricing is a cost-effective and technology-neutral tool for getting industry to
take account of its emissions in business decisions. Pricing policies like the Carbon
Price Support and EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) have helped drive a switch
from coal to gas generation in the power sector, and the UK ETS will be a key part of
the framework to reduce emissions from industry.
In January 2021, we established a UK ETS to replace the UK’s participation in the EU
ETS. To reflect our ambition on carbon pricing, the cap on allowances – which
19
20

BEIS, Energy white paper: Powering our net zero future, 14 December 2020
BEIS, Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy, 17 March 2021 p28

7

Commons Library Briefing, 4 May 2021

represents the overall limit of emissions allowed in the system – will be aligned with
the UK’s net zero ambition by January 2024. In 2021, we will carry out a review of the
UK ETS. This will include consulting on a net zero consistent emissions cap; reviewing
the long-term role of free allowances; exploring expanding the scope of the scheme
to cover more sectors of the economy and linking with other schemes internationally;
and considering the case for a supply adjustment mechanism.
Some industrial businesses, or facilities within an installation, will remain out of scope
of the UK ETS at this time. For those businesses, we expect the Climate Change Levy
(CCL) and action agreed through the Climate Change Agreements (CCA) scheme to
act as a driver for energy efficiency improvements and decarbonisation. The CCA
scheme has recently been extended by two years, providing significantly reduced CCL
rates until March 2025 for participants who meet their targets. We intend to
undertake further assessment of the purpose and targeting of a long-term scheme
following the extension, informed by the responses to last year’s consultation. 21

In addition, the Government set out its intention to examine options on how the UK ETS
could “be developed to incentivise deployment of negative emissions through greenhouse
gas removal (GGR). 22
The Strategy also provided estimates of industry spending on the UK ETS of £390m per
year (based on previous EU ETS costs for 2019) and a cost to Government of £1.05 billion
per year (based on 2019) of free allowances for energy-intensive industries. Free
allowances are the “main policy instrument through which carbon leakage risk and
competitiveness impacts are addressed under the UK ETS”. 23

Commentary
The BEIS Select Committee held two evidence sessions on the UK ETS framework in
October and November 2020, before the final announcement to go ahead with the
scheme.
Ember, a climate change and energy think tank, published an article in December 2020
calling for the minimum allowance price to be set at £22 at least, as this was the average
EU ETS allowance price in the last two years.
The Energy and Climate Information Unit, a climate think tank, published detailed analysis
Brexit: moving from the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) to the UK-only ETS, following
the announcement of a UK ETS being introduced.

Judicial review of UK ETS cap
Judicial review proceedings where initiated in 2020 following the publication of the
consultation response and impact assessment, with the case to be heard on 14 April
2021. The argument, as set out by Leigh Day solicitors, is that the emissions cap for 2021
does not comply with existing legislation or targets:
Represented by Leigh Day solicitors, as well as David Wolfe QC at Matrix chambers
and Ben Mitchell at 11KBW chambers, Georgia argues that in setting up the UK
Emissions Trading Scheme (UK ETS), the governments did not consider the short and
medium-term aspects of the UK’s obligations under the Paris Agreement which
requires substantial and immediate emission reductions, not just net zero by 2050.
Georgia’s case is that the Climate Change Act 2008 grants the power to set up the
UK ETS to limit greenhouse gas emissions, not to set an emissions cap to facilitate a
smoother withdrawal from the EU.

21
22
23

BEIS, Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy, 17 March 2021 p29
BEIS, Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy, 17 March 2021 p33
BEIS, Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy, 17 March 2021 p108

8

The UK Emissions Trading Scheme

The cap on the UK ETS in its first year will be 156 mtCO2e, substantially higher than
the projected ‘business-as-usual’ emissions of 126-131 mtCO2e for 2021. 24

The BEIS Impact Assessment states the following on the cap:
In 2021 this notional minus 5% cap level equates to around 156 MtCO2e (based on
the assumed scope of the policy set out earlier). This is higher than our BAU emissions
projections in that year (ranging from around 126 to 131 MtCO2e). However, there is
significant uncertainty over these projections and market participant behaviour in this
initial period could lead to significant demand for allowances above BAU emissions.
This in turn means there is uncertainty over the level of demand for allowances in
these years relative to supply, and therefore risk of extreme high or low prices.
Given these uncertainties we therefore believe it is appropriate to maintain sufficient
headroom of allowances for a time-limited period at the start of the new system.
However we believe that initially tightening the cap by 5% provides an appropriate
balance between climate ambition in the context of the UK’s net zero commitment
and businesses competitiveness, which may be at risk due to early years’ market
behaviour.

It Impact Assessment also refers to the policy objective of establishing links with the EU
ETS scheme:
We assess the design of the UK ETS set out in the accompanying government
response document, in its initial years of operation (from 2021 to 2024). This system is
intended to fulfil the policy objectives outlined above as a standalone system, while
also providing a platform to negotiate a linked system with the EU ETS, if it is in the
best interests of both parties.

The case also challenges the decision to exclude energy from waste from the UK ETS,
arguing that their emissions are “equivalent to approximately 5.4 per cent of the entire
volume of greenhouse gas emissions covered by the UK Emissions Trading Scheme (UK
ETS).”

4. UK ETS implementation
The Government published detailed guidance on participation in the UK ETS on 10 March
2021. This includes an implementation timetable, details of free allocations and, as for the
EU ETS, exemptions for hospitals and small emitters. It also sets out that participants in the
EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) must still comply with their obligations under that
system for the 2020 compliance year which ended April 2021, provides further specific
guidance on this. The guidance sets the UK ETS Auction Reserve Price (ARP) at £22, which
is the minimum to be paid at auction, rather than the £15 announced in the consultation
response.
As a comparison, EUA prices have risen sharply since the end of 2020 and were over €40
in April 2010 (around £35). 25 This is a historic high; EUAs cost less than €10 per tonne in
2011 although by 2018 the price started to rise and reached €28 in 2019. 26
The Government announced on 17 December 2020 that it had appointed International
Exchange Inc (ICE) to host UK emissions auctions for the UK Emissions Trading Scheme. It
is also the host for the EU ETS. This was followed on 26 February 2021 by an
announcement that the first auction for UK ETS allowances would be on 19 May 2021:

24

25
26

Leigh Day, Judicial review hearing over carbon emissions levels permitted under UK’s new emissions
trading scheme, 12 April 2021
ICE, ICE EUA futures [website visited 13 April 2021]
CarbonBrief, Q&A will the reformed EU ETS raise carbon prices? 6 December 2017 [accessed 3 September
2018]

9

Commons Library Briefing, 4 May 2021

“The publication of our ambitious UK Emissions Trading Scheme’s auction calendar is
another crucial step towards our target of eliminating our contribution to climate
change by 2050,” said UK Energy Minister Anne-Marie Trevelyan. “Our scheme is
even more ambitious than the EU system it replaces and today’s publication will give
businesses and operators clarity over this year’s supply of emissions allowances,
enabling them to plan ahead, build back greener and better prepare for the transition
to a low-carbon economy”.
“We are excited about the addition of a new carbon market and believe the UK ETS
will be pivotal in supporting the climate ambitions of the four governments of the
UK”, said Gordon Bennett, Managing Director of Utility Markets at ICE. “UK
emissions have fallen 41% since 1990, more than any other major developed country
and this has been driven by the UK’s leadership in promoting market-based
mechanisms to support climate goals. There is an enormous opportunity for cap and
trade programs to take an even greater role in supporting the goals of the Paris
Agreement, whether it is increasing their sector coverage or encouraging international
linking. 27

Free allocation review
On 17 March 2021, BEIS launched a call for evidence as part of its UK ETS free allocation
review, including input on:
•

key questions the review should consider, and the problems we should be
looking at

•

how we can make free allocations fairer and more targeted when reducing in
line with the reduction in the overall cap

•

examples and evidence of carbon leakage to help inform future free allocation
policy. 28

5. Linking to the EU ETS
The UK -EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) refers to carbon pricing in the
section dealing with the level playing field, under Part 7.3: Carbon pricing. This requires
both the UK and EU to have an effective system of carbon pricing in place as of 1 January
2021 covering emissions from electricity generation, heat generation, industry and
aviation. The TCA also commits to exploring options to link both schemes:
The Parties shall cooperate on carbon pricing. They shall give serious consideration to
linking their respective carbon pricing systems in a way that preserves the integrity of
these systems and provides for the possibility to increase their effectiveness. 29

The Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy does mention linking emissions trading systems
under a heading on supporting industrial decarbonisation through trade policy, but does
not mention the EU ETS specifically:
Supporting greater collaboration on decarbonisation, such as exploring opportunities
for practical cooperation on carbon pricing, including through possible linking of
emissions trading systems, and committing to increased joint information exchanges
and cooperative working in international forums. 30

In June 2020 the industry trade body, Energy UK, welcomed the Government’s aim of a
linked UK ETS and the introduction of an auction reserve price:

27
28

29
30

ICE, ICE publishes auction calendar for UK’s new Emissions Trading Scheme, 26 February 2021
EUAs were at EUR 21.06 on 31 August 2018 and EUR 28.99 on 26 July 2019 according to ICE EUA futures
via Sandbag and Quandl.
UK/EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement, 24 December 2020
BEIS, Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy, 17 March 2021

10 The UK Emissions Trading Scheme

We strongly support Government establishing a UK ETS linked to the EU ETS and back
its efforts to agree this approach with the EU. This is the best long-term carbon
pricing mechanism to continue driving decarbonisation at the lowest cost to
consumers, which will allow us to benefit from the liquidity of the world’s largest
carbon market and help us meet our net zero target by 2050.
In the event that a linking agreement cannot be secured in time for 1 January 2021,
we welcome Government’s decision to introduce stability measures such as an
Auction Reserve Price (ARP) to protect a newly-established stand-alone UK ETS from
market shocks and volatility due to its smaller size 31

There is a precedent for a linked ETSs. Switzerland is not a participant in the EU ETS but in
November 2017 it signed an agreement to link its emissions trading system with the EU
ETS. 32 The agreement entered into force on 1 January 2020. Linking a UK ETS with the EU
ETS would require agreement between both parties and be subject to negotiation.
The E3G report on Climate change in the Brexit negotiations , published May 2020, noted
that although both the UK and EU seem to have significant alignment in their approach,
linking trading systems can take years of negotiation:
However, although many of the high-level objectives have significant alignment the
pathway to achieving this is far from automatic. The experience of linking the Swiss
emissions trading system to the EU-ETS required years of negotiation to work through
all the detail. It is therefore vital that substantive negotiations on these issues begin as
soon as possible. 33

Overall, the process to link the Swiss ETS to the EU ETS took 10 years, partly because it
was part of wider negotiations on trade. 34

31
32
33

34

Energy UK, Energy UK responds to UK Government's ETS proposal, 2 June 2020
EU, EU and Switzerland sign agreement to link emissions trading systems, 23 November 2017
E3G Briefing Paper, Climate change in the Brexit negotiations, Shane Tomlinson, May 2020 [accessed 16
June 2020]
Council of the EU press release, Linking of Switzerland to the EU emissions trading system - entry into
force on 1 January 2020, 9 December 2019

About the Library
The House of Commons Library research service provides MPs and their staff with the impartial briefing and
evidence base they need to do their work in scrutinising Government, proposing legislation, and supporting
constituents.
As well as providing MPs with a confidential service we publish open briefing papers, which are available on the
Parliament website.
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly available research briefings is correct
at the time of publication. Readers should be aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated or
otherwise amended to reflect subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email papers@parliament.uk. Authors are available to discuss the
content of this briefing only with Members and their staff.
If you have any general questions about the work of the House of Commons you can email hcinfo@parliament.uk.

Disclaimer
This information is provided to Members of Parliament in support of their parliamentary duties. It is a general
briefing only and should not be relied on as a substitute for specific advice. The House of Commons or the
author(s) shall not be liable for any errors or omissions, or for any loss or damage of any kind arising from its use,
and may remove, vary or amend any information at any time without prior notice.
The House of Commons accepts no responsibility for any references or links to, or the content of, information
maintained by third parties. This information is provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.

