BRIEFING PAPER
Number 9190, 20 May 2021

The UK-EU Trade and
Cooperation Agreement:
Level Playing Field

By Elena Ares, Dominic
Carver, Stefano Fella,
Daniel Ferguson, Ilze
Jozepa, Antony Seely, Ali
Shalchi
Contents:
1. Overview
2. Competition policy
3. Subsidy control
4. State-owned enterprises and
designated monopolies
5. Taxation
6. Labour and social protection
7. Environment and climate
8. Dispute settlement

www.parliament.uk/commons-library | intranet.parliament.uk/commons-library | papers@parliament.uk | @commonslibrary

2

The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Contents
Summary

4

1.
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4

Overview
Negotiations
Level playing field in the TCA
Dispute resolution mechanisms
Parliamentary scrutiny

6
6
7
10
11

2.
2.1
2.2

Competition policy
Negotiating positions
The TCA

13
13
14

3.
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7

Subsidy control
Negotiating positions
The TCA: Definitions and scope
Principles of subsidy control
Independent enforcement body
The role of courts
Dispute settlement and remedies
Issues and commentary

17
17
20
21
23
23
24
26

4.
4.1
4.2

State-owned enterprises and designated monopolies
Negotiating positions
The TCA

31
31
32

5.
5.1
5.2

Taxation
Negotiating positions
The TCA

33
33
35

6.
6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5

Labour and social protection
Negotiating positions
The TCA
Multilateral labour standards
Rebalancing
Dispute settlement

38
38
41
44
45
46

7.
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.6
7.7
7.8

Environment and climate
Overview
The TCA: Definitions and terms
Trade and sustainable development
Non-regression from levels of protection
Enforcement
Rebalancing
Issues and commentary
Climate Change
Commentary

47
47
47
49
50
50
51
52
56
57

8.
8.1
8.2
8.3

Dispute settlement
The general governance and dispute settlement mechanisms
Exceptions and Bespoke Provisions for the Level playing field
Panel of Experts for Labour, environment and climate, sustainable development
Panel recommendations and compliance
Cross-retaliation for non-compliance
Provisions for subsidies
Rebalancing mechanism
Review provisions

60
60
61
61
63
63
65
65
68

8.4
8.5
8.6

3

Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

Cover page image copyright: Image from Pixabay. No attribution required / image
cropped.

4

The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Summary
This briefing covers the outcome of the UK and EU negotiations on commitments to have
a level playing field – an important part of the UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement
(TCA). These commitments cover competition policy, subsidy control, state-owned
enterprises, taxation, labour and social standards, environmental protection and climate
change.
Level playing field provisions in trade agreements are there to ensure competition is open
and fair and that businesses from one trading partner do not gain a competitive
advantage and undercut rivals from another. The TCA has the most extensive provisions
seen in any free trade agreement to date.
Level playing field negotiations
The divergent positions of the EU and UK Government led to the level playing field being
one of the most contentious areas of the negotiations.
Referring to UK-EU geographical and economic proximity, the EU proposed that legally
binding commitments be included in the agreement, with EU rules and standards as a
reference point, and a commitment to strong domestic enforcement mechanisms. The UK
Government said the UK would maintain the highest standards in the level playing field
areas, but the ability to set its own laws was central to its vision. It would not accept
alignment with EU rules and obligations that go further than commitments in standard
free trade agreements.
The most substantial disagreements arose over subsidies, where the EU proposed that the
UK follows EU state aid rules as they change over time. The UK proposed to base its
commitments on World Trade Organization anti-subsidy rules with weaker enforcement
mechanisms.
The differences on environmental and climate, labour and social standards, concerned
how far the parties should remain “dynamically aligned”. The UK and EU disagreed over
whether they be prohibited from lowering labour and environmental standards (nonregression clause), and whether one party should have to raise its standards if the other
party raised theirs (the ratchet clause).
The Agreement
The resulting provisions in the TCA represent a compromise to find a balance between
sufficient guarantees that future divergence of regulations would safeguard fair
competition and the freedom of the parties to set their own rules for social and
environmental protection and subsidy policy.
The main level playing field provisions are set out in Title XI of Part Two of the TCA. The
EU and UK recognise that to prevent distortion of “trade or investment” between the
parties, conditions are required to ensure a level playing field for open and fair
competition. The TCA says that while the UK and EU are committed to maintaining and
improving their respective high standards, they reaffirm their right to regulate and
recognise that the purpose of the commitments is not to harmonise those standards.
Subsidies
The TCA requires both the UK and EU to have an effective system of subsidy control but
neither has to comply with the rules of the other. Both subsidy control regimes must
follow common “broad principles”. These principles have to ensure that subsidies are
proportionate, transparent and contribute to public policy goals.

5

Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

A distinct feature is that one of the parties can take unilateral remedial measures if there is
evidence that a subsidy of the other party risks creating a “significant negative effect” on
UK-EU trade and investment.
The TCA provisions on subsidies do not amend the state aid provisions of the Withdrawal
Agreement Protocol on Ireland and Northern Ireland. This means that EU state aid rules
apply to subsidies affecting trade in goods between Northern Ireland and the EU.
Non-regression
The Agreement’s provisions on labour and social protection, the environment and climate,
recognise that both the UK and EU may establish their own levels of protection, without
harmonising their rules. Non-regression provisions are there to ensure that protections are
not reduced below the levels at the end of the transition period if that would affect trade
or investment. The UK and EU both commit to maintaining effective oversight and
enforcement systems, with administrative or judicial means of challenge and redress.
In the chapter on competition, both sides agree to maintain a domestic system that
addresses anti-competitive business behaviours. A chapter on state-owned enterprises
focuses on preventing anti-competitive practices among companies where governments
are involved. Provisions on taxation include commitments to have good tax governance.
Dispute settlement provisions
The TCA has complex and bespoke provisions for dispute settlement between the parties.
This involves consultations, recourse to an independent arbitration tribunal, and temporary
cross-retaliation. The Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) has no role in the dispute
settlement provisions. The provisions on competition policy and taxation are excluded
from the dispute resolution.
The most innovative aspect of the Agreement’s dispute settlement is a rebalancing
mechanism for the level playing field. If significant divergence in subsidy policy, labour and
social policy, or climate and environment policy, arises between the UK and EU, and this
has material impacts on trade or investment, both parties have the right to take
countermeasures, subject to arbitration. In simple terms, if one side raises its standards
and the other does not, the former can take reciprocal action. These rebalancing measures
could include temporary suspension of parts of the Agreement or tariffs, but are not
defined beyond that.
Further provisions allow for a review of the ‘Trade’ heading of the TCA. This is in case of a
persistent dispute, including on the application of the relevant level playing field
commitments. This mechanism opens up the possibility of the entire trade part of the
agreement being suspended.

6

The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

1. Overview
1.1 Negotiations
Commitments on Level playing field are among the key elements of the
UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement. 1 They concern cross-cutting
provisions for competition, subsidies, taxation, labour and social
standards, environmental protection and climate policies, which
are not linked to a particular sector of cooperation. The purpose of
these provisions is to ensure that competition is open and fair and that
businesses of one party do not gain a competitive advantage and
undercut their rivals in another country by avoiding the costs of more
stringent regulations.
The negotiations on the level playing field provisions were contentious.
In the non-binding Political Declaration that accompanied the 2019
Withdrawal Agreement the EU and UK set out a joint commitment to
an ambitious economic partnership. The Political Declaration would
form the departure point for the UK and EU negotiations. In the
document, referring to the geographical proximity and economic
interdependence of both markets, the parties agreed to ensure that
commitments to “a level playing field for open and fair competition”
will underpin their economic partnership. The precise nature of these
commitments would be “commensurate with the scope and depth of
the future relationship”. This would be ensured by “robust
commitments” – upholding the common high standards applicable at
the end of the transition period in the areas of state aid, competition,
social and employment standards, environment, climate change, and
relevant tax matters. 2
Following the UK’s withdrawal from the EU on 31 January 2020, the UK
and EU entered formal negotiations in March 2020, with the aim of
securing agreement on their new partnership by the end of the year.
From the start of the negotiations, the UK and EU had fundamentally
different approaches to the level playing field. The EU said that it would
agree a free trade deal with zero tariffs and zero quotas only if the UK
agreed to level playing field commitments. The EU emphasised that the
UK-EU trading relationship was fundamentally different from that with
its other trading partners due to geographic and economic proximity.
This would justify legally binding commitments, with EU rules and
standards as a reference point, and strong enforcement mechanisms
domestically.
The UK Government reiterated the principle of sovereignty and it’s right
to regulate. It stated that the UK would maintain the highest standards
in the level playing field areas but could not agree to obligations that go
further than commitments in standard free trade agreements. The Prime

1

2

Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, UK/EU and EAEC: Trade and
Cooperation Agreement, CP 426, 30 April 2021 (‘TCA’)
Political Declaration setting out the framework for the future relationship between
the European Union and the United Kingdom, 19 October 2019

7

Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

Minister’s written statement of 3 February 2020 on UK-EU relations set
out the Government’s position:
The Government will not agree to measures in these areas which
go beyond those typically included in a comprehensive free trade
agreement. The Government believes therefore that both Parties
should recognise their respective commitments to maintaining
high standards in these areas; confirm that they will uphold their
international obligations; and agree to avoid using measures in
these areas to distort trade. 3

For the level playing field areas, the EU and UK positions converged on
competition, state-owned enterprises, and taxation (with an exception
on tax avoidance). However, substantial divergences appeared with
regard to subsidy control, social and labour regulation, environmental
regulations, and the fight against climate change.
For further analysis of the UK and EU negotiating positions see
Commons Library briefing 8852, The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation
Agreement: Level Playing Field, section 1. See also Commons Library
briefings 8834, The UK-EU future relationship negotiations: process and
issues, sections 3 and 4.4; and 8977, UK-EU future relationship
negotiations update: is an agreement possible?, section 3.
Despite some aspects of the level playing field – future (dis)alignment of
subsidy rules and the enforcement of non-regression of labour and
environmental standards – being among the most difficult subjects in
the negotiations, parties reached an agreement on 24 December 2020.

1.2 Level playing field in the TCA
Level playing field provisions are set out in Title XI of Part Two [Level
Playing Field for Open and Fair Competition and Sustainable
Development] of the Agreement.
Chapter I of Title XI contains the general provisions. The Parties
recognise in Article 355 that in order to prevent distortion of 'trade or
investment' between the EU and UK, conditions are required to ensure
a level playing field for open and fair competition. The Agreement
should also contribute to the objectives of sustainable development.
While the parties commit to maintaining and improving their respective
high standards, they recognise that the purpose of the commitments is
not to harmonise these standards.
Article 365 reaffirms the right of the parties to regulate. It
acknowledges the precautionary approach to potential threats of
serious or irreversible damage to the environment or human health (see
further, section 7.1 below). Parties also commit to following the relevant
scientific and technical information, and international standards and
guidelines when they develop new regulations in the area of
environmental protection and labour conditions.
Most modern free trade agreements contain provisions of some sort to
uphold certain (international) labour or environmental standards or
include pledges to maintain open competition. The TCA has the most
3

UK/EU relations: Written statement, HCWS86, 3 February 2020

8

The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

extensive provisions on level playing field seen in any free trade
agreement to date. 4
Chapter 2 of Title XI covers competition. The positions of the UK and
EU converged on competition issues during the TCA negotiations. Both
sides agree to maintain a competition law system that addresses anticompetitive behaviours. The UK and EU now operate separate
competition regimes. The TCA does not change the UK or EU
competition law rules, which are substantially the same but may diverge
in the future. The UK and EU agree to enforce competition law in a
transparent and non-discriminatory manner, and have competition
authorities which shall co-operate on their activities. The general
provisions on dispute settlement do not apply to the competition
provisions.
Mutual commitments on subsidy control are set out in Chapter 3.
Both the UK and EU are required to have an effective system of subsidy
control and an independent body to oversee it from 1 January 2021.
However, the Agreement does not require the UK Government to set
up a control mechanism before any subsidy is paid out, as is required
under the current EU regime. The UK can itself determine the precise
nature of its domestic subsidy control regime and the role of any
independent enforcement body, within the principles and rules agreed
in the TCA.
The chapter on subsidies sets out the common “broad principles”
according to which UK and EU subsidy control would operate. These
principles have to ensure that subsidies contribute to achieving public
policy objectives by addressing market failures or social problems. They
have to be proportionate, necessary, and be the appropriate instrument
to achieve the objectives. Their positive effect has to outweigh any
negative impact on mutual trade.
Some subsidies are partially exempt from the TCA provisions, for
example, temporary subsidies granted in response to a national
emergency. Certain subsidies are prohibited if they “have or could have
a material effect on trade or investment between the Parties”.
Conditions are created to grant subsidies in some areas, for example
sustainable energy.
Chapter 3 further contains provisions on domestic enforcement, a
bespoke dispute settlement mechanism and unilateral remedial
measures.
Besides an independent enforcement body, the subsidy control system
requires that the courts must be able to hear claims from interested
parties, review subsidy decisions and grant effective remedies, in
accordance with each party’s domestic law. A unique feature for
subsidies is that either side can intervene in the other’s domestic court
proceedings concerning the subsidy rules if the court permits it to do so.
Additionally, a mechanism must be in place to recover subsidies which
4

International Trade Committee, Oral evidence: UK-EU trading relationship, HC 1206,
22 April 2021, Qq 110, 112

9

Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

are provided unlawfully. However, if a subsidy is granted by an Act of
Parliament, a recovery will not be required.
The TCA contains a set of specific provisions to address disputes on the
application of subsidy provisions.
The provisions on subsidies in the Agreement do not amend the state
aid provisions (Article 10) of the Withdrawal Agreement Protocol on
Ireland and Northern Ireland, meaning that EU state aid rules apply to
subsidies affecting trade in goods and wholesale electricity between
Northern Ireland and the EU. 5 The TCA does not explain how the
provisions of the TCA and Protocol will interact.
In Chapter 4 of the Agreement the UK and EU commit to ensuring that
state-owned enterprises, companies with special rights, and
designated monopolies, do not engage in anti-competitive practices or
discriminatory and abusive behaviour creating barriers to trade and
investment. These provisions put private businesses on an equal footing
with businesses where the governments are involved when the latter
engage in commercial activities.
Chapter 5 briefly deals with taxation. The agreement contains a
commitment to good governance and upholding the taxation standards
on exchange of tax information, anti-tax avoidance and transparency.
The common provisions refer to international standards, including OECD
standards. Finally, this aspect of the agreement is excluded from the
general arrangements for dispute resolution.
For provisions on labour and social protection, and the
environment and climate, the Agreement recognises that both the
UK and EU may establish their own levels of protection. 6 As a European
Parliament assessment sets out:
Standards are not meant to be harmonised, but the parties
endeavour to maintain and improve their respective high
standards. The parties affirm each other’s right to set their policies
and priorities. 7

At the same time, a form of non-regression approach is used which
requires that the level of protection is not lowered below the level in
place at the end of the transition period if that would impact trade or
investment between the UK and EU. This means that in order to
demonstrate a breach of the non-regression clause either party would
have to show that any attempt to lower labour or environmental
standards affects UK-EU trade or investment. The Institute for Public
Policy Research has described this qualification as “setting a very high
bar for proof”. 8

5

6
7

8

HM Government, Agreement on the withdrawal of the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland from the European Union and the European Atomic
Energy Community, 19 October 2019, [Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland, p292]

TCA, Chapter 6 [Labour and Social Standards], Chapter 7 [Environment and Climate]
European Parliament note, First appraisal of the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation
Agreement, PE 662.902, March 2021, p10
Marley Morris, The agreement on the future relationship: first analysis, IPPR, p7

10 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

The UK and EU both commit to maintaining effective oversight and
enforcement systems, with administrative or judicial means of challenge
and redress.
Chapter 8 sets out the foundations and broad objectives for trade and
sustainable development. This is based primarily on the principles of and
commitments to international agreements such as the Rio Declaration
and the Sustainable Development Goals. The parties also commit to
promote and implement the core labour standards recognised in the
International Labour Organisation’s (ILO) eight Fundamental
Conventions.

1.3 Dispute resolution mechanisms
The dispute settlement mechanisms are central to the TCA architecture
and must ensure the enforcement of the level playing field. The
mechanisms deployed in this area are complex and the procedures vary
between policy areas. Both the main TCA dispute settlement
mechanisms apply, and additional bespoke mechanisms are set out for
subsidies, labour standards, environment and climate. These are
discussed in more detail in section 8 below. Provisions on competition
policy and taxation are excluded from the dispute settlement
mechanisms altogether.
The most innovative aspect of the agreement dispute resolution process
is a rebalancing mechanism for the level playing field set out in
Article 411. In certain circumstances, both parties have the right “to
take countermeasures if they believe they are being damaged by
measures taken by the other party in subsidy policy, labour and social
policy, or climate and environment policy”, subject to arbitration. 9
This would be the case if significant divergences between the UK and
EU in those areas would arise and have material impacts on trade or
investment. In simple terms, if one side raises its standards and the
other does not, it can take reciprocal action, subject to independent
assessment by an arbitration tribunal.
The mechanism in the agreement foresees that, if consultations
between the UK and EU are unsuccessful, either party can take
unilateral temporary and proportionate “rebalancing measures,” based
on “reliable evidence” and not on “conjecture or remote possibility”.
Exactly what measures may be taken, or how connected they must be
to the area of divergence, is not specified, suggesting that they need
not be limited to the precise matter at dispute. The other party may
challenge any such measures before an arbitration tribunal. This
rebalancing mechanism is reciprocal, as opposed to the unilateral
mechanisms initially proposed by the EU.
As the UK Government’s summary document notes, if the rebalancing
mechanism is triggered too frequently either side can initiate a review of
the relevant provisions and the trade aspects of the TCA more broadly

9

HM Government, UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Summary, December
2020, para 81

11 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

and this may lead to adjustment of the balance of rights and
obligations.
There is uncertainty as to how the level playing field provisions of the
Agreement will be applied in practice and what effect they will have on
specific sectors and on the UK-EU trading relationship in general.
During the negotiation of the TCA, there were significant differences in
the UK and EU positions on labour and social standards, and
environmental protection. They concerned the extent to which the
parties should remain “dynamically aligned” and be prohibited from
lowering labour and environmental standards (non-regression), and
whether one party should have to raise its standards if the other party
chose to raise theirs (ratchet clause). There was also a discussion on
dynamic alignment with EU state aid rules. The resulting TCA does not
require that the UK follows EU rules as they evolve. However, Sussex
University UK Trade Policy Observatory researchers argue that the
rebalancing mechanism included in the TCA constitutes a defensive
version of dynamic alignment, in that rather than focussing on
cooperation and harmonisation it provides alternative means for one
side to coerce the other. But triggering the rebalancing mechanism of
Article 411 repeatedly could have a rather destabilising effect on the
overall cooperation:
… if there is a series of rebalancing episodes, if either party
triggers the review provided for in [Article 411], or anyway in the
standard five-yearly review, there are likely to be high feelings on
both sides of the table. That is, far from smoothing the path to
cooperation, stability and certainty, the dispute settlement
processes of the LPFs Title could have exactly the opposite effect.
That, inevitably, will discourage investment in anything that
depends on the smooth flow of UK-EU trade. 10

1.4 Parliamentary scrutiny
UK Parliament
The UK Parliament passed legislation enabling the ratification and
domestic implementation of the TCA on 30 December 2020 and the
Agreement entered into provisional application on 1 January 2021.
Since then parliamentary select committees have scrutinised aspects of
the TCA on several occasions, including provisions on the level playing
field.
•

Committee on the Future Relationship with the European Union,
Oral evidence: Progress of the negotiations on the UK’s future
relationship with the EU, HC 203, 6 January 2021

•

HL European Union Committee, Uncorrected oral evidence: Future
UK-EU relations: governance, 2 February 2021

•

HL European Union Committee, 21st Report of Session 2019-21
Beyond Brexit: the institutional framework, HL 246, 22 March 2021

10

Emily Lydgate, Erika Szyszczak, L. Alan Winters, Chloe Anthony, Taking Stock of the
UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Governance, State Subsidies and the
Level Playing Field, UKTPO, Briefing Paper 54, January 2021

12 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

•

HL European Union Committee, EU Environment Sub-Committee,
22nd Report of Session 2019–21: Beyond Brexit: food, environment,
energy and health, HL 247, 23 March 2021

•

International Trade Committee, Oral evidence: UK-EU trading
relationship, HC 1206, 22 April 2021

European Parliament resolution
The European Parliament gave its consent to the TCA on 28 April 2021,
paving the way for its full entry into force on 1 May 2021. Parliament’s
Resolution welcomed the agreement’s “modern” level playing field
provisions which “should be considered as a model for other future Free
Trade Agreements negotiated by the EU”. The Parliament also
emphasised its key concerns for the level playing field:
─

The need to ensure that significant divergence with material
impact on trade or investment is broadly interpreted and
can be demonstrated in a practical manner to ensure that
the ability to use such measures is not unduly restricted.

─

The need to monitor the new UK State aid regime and
assess the efficacy of the mechanism to address unjustified
subsidies;
It recalled that provisions on the level playing field apply in a
general manner, including in so-called special economic
zones. This is a reference to the UK Government’s plans to
finance a number of new Freeports, “hubs for global trade
and investment,” across the UK.

─

Regretting the limited provisions on taxation, the EP
requested the Commission remain vigilant on questions of
taxation and money laundering. It suggested a possibility to
review this relationship four years after the entry into force
of the Agreement should imbalances arise. 11

─

How a future possible unilateral lowering of social and
labour standards by the UK would be addressed and
contested under the Agreement. 12

During the debate, MEPs from all major political groups stressed the
importance of having enforceable level playing field provisions,
including for social and environmental standards.

11

12

European Parliament Resolution of 28 April 2021 on the outcome of EU-UK
negotiations, para 18
European Parliament Resolution of 28 April 2021 on the outcome of EU-UK
negotiations, para 32

13 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

2. Competition policy
2.1 Negotiating positions
The positions of the UK and EU converged on competition issues during
the TCA negotiations. Other EU and UK free trade agreements contain
comparable provisions and adhere to similar principles of transparency,
non-discrimination, and procedural fairness.

UK position
The UK’s negotiating objectives (Chapter 21), which were published on
27 February 2020, highlighted a desire for both parties “to maintain
effective competition laws, covering merger control, anticompetitive
agreements and abuse of dominance, while maintaining the right to
provide for public policy exemptions”. The document argued that there
is no need for legal or regulatory alignment. Rather, it promoted
“regulatory freedom to respond to new and emerging challenges in
these areas.” 13
It argued for “transparent, non-discriminatory rules and enforcement
procedures” and “effective cooperation”.
With one exception, chapter 22 of the May 2020 UK draft
Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement was if anything more general
than the provisions set out in the earlier negotiating objectives, referring
generally to principles of “free and undistorted competition” and the
importance to all of taking action against “anti-competitive business
conduct”. 14
But paragraph 3 of Article 22.2 included a new emphasis on the
importance of “cooperation and coordination” between competition
authorities to achieve this, going as far as admitting the possibility of “a
separate agreement” on effective competition law.
The proposed approach would reflect recent agreements with Canada,
Japan and South Korea in excluding competition issues from the wider
dispute resolution mechanism.

EU position
The EU’s negotiating directives adopted on 25 February proposed that:
97. The envisaged partnership should provide that anticompetitive
agreements, abuses of dominant position and concentrations of
undertakings that threaten to distort competition are prohibited,
unless remedied, in so far as they affect trade between the Union
and the United Kingdom. The Parties should also commit to
effective enforcement via a competition law and domestic
administrative and judicial proceedings, permitting the effective

13

14

HM Government, The Future Relationship with the EU: The UK’s Approach to
Negotiations, CP 211, 27 February 2020, Chapter 16
HM Government, Draft working text for a Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement
between the United Kingdom and the European Union (CFTA), 19 May 2020,
Chapter 22

14 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

and timely action against violations of competition rules, and to
effective remedies. 15

Section 2 of the EU draft Agreement of 18 March 2020 elaborates on
commitments in competition set out in the negotiating directives. Anticompetitive practices are prohibited as far as those affect trade between
the UK and the EU. There is no direct reference to EU competition law,
but much of the text is “derived from EU law (largely copied from the
EU treaties) and enforceable in the courts of each party”, which would
by extension require the UK “to apply competition rules essentially
identical to those in force in the EU”. 16
There are provisions regarding cooperation on policy development and
cooperation between competition authorities. Provisions on competition
would not be covered by the Agreement dispute settlement mechanism
(Part Five, Title II), except for the requirement to have an enforcement
body.

2.2 The TCA
The TCA only briefly deals with competition policy in Chapter 2, Articles
358-362.
In it, the EU and the UK “recognise the importance of free and
undistorted competition”. Both agree to maintain a competition law
system that addresses
•

agreements and practices that seek to prevent, restrict or distort
competition

•

abuses of dominant positions, and

•

mergers or acquisitions (for the EU, “concentrations”) which have
anti-competitive effects. This competition law system must apply to
all economic actors regardless of nationality or ownership status.

The TCA does not change the substance of UK or EU competition law
rules, which are substantially the same. So currently, what is likely to be
unlawful under EU competition rules is also likely to be unlawful under
UK competition rules. In the future, however, UK courts are not
required to follow EU competition case-law. Divergences are likely to
emerge over time. There is also the potential for parallel European
Commission and UK Competition and Markets Authority investigations
of the same conduct, if that conduct impacts trade both between EU
Member States and, separately, in the UK. 17
The UK and EU now operate separate competition regimes. The EU
Merger Regulation, with its one-stop shop rule that allowed the
European Commission to review mergers across national borders, no

15

16

17

EU General Affairs Council, Directives for the negotiation of a new partnership with
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 5870/20, 25 Feb 2020
Institute for Government, UK–EU future relationship negotiations: key flashpoints
(accessed May 2021)
See William Fry, The impact of Brexit on State Aid, Public Procurement, Merger
Control and Competition Rules (accessed May 2021)

15 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

longer applies in the UK. Transactions now need to satisfy merger
control rules in both the UK and EU. 18
Each party is allowed an exemption from such competition law for
“legitimate public policy objectives”, so long as these exemptions are
transparent and proportionate to those objectives.
The UK and EU agree to enforce competition law in a transparent and
non-discriminatory manner, and have competition authorities which
shall co-operate on their activities. This includes the exchange of
information. In future, the UK and EU may enter into a separate
agreement on co-operation and co-ordination between the European
Commission, the competition authorities of the EU Member States and
the UK’s competition authority, which may include conditions for the
exchange and use of confidential information. Officials from the UK and
EU have indicated that they are keen for such an agreement to be
finalised soon. It might include enhanced co-operation, mutual
notifications and coordination of enforcement. 19
Consistent with the negotiation positions of both sides, the general
provisions on dispute settlement (Title I of Part Six) do not apply to the
competition provisions.

Standards in other EU trade agreements
Other EU trade agreements contain provisions on competition that are
comparable to the TCA.
Canada
Chapter 17 of the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement
(CETA) sets out arrangements for competition, highlighting “the
principles of transparency, non-discrimination, and procedural fairness”.
Any exclusions will be transparent and both parties will share relevant
information about such exclusions. There are no arrangements for
dispute settlement. CETA also refers to a more detailed 1999 agreement
between the EU and Canada on the application of competition laws.
Japan
Chapter 11 of the EU-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement, which
builds on a 2003 agreement on anti-competitive activities, promotes
similar principles. It permits exemptions, “provided that such
exemptions are transparent and are limited to those necessary for
securing public interest. Such exemptions shall not go beyond what is
strictly necessary to achieve the public interest objectives that have been
defined by that Party”. The agreement is not subject to wider
arrangements for dispute resolution.
South Korea
Chapter 11 of the EU-South Korea Free Trade Agreement of 2010 also
highlights general principles of the type mentioned above. In
18

19

See Norton Rose Fulbright, The impact of Brexit on antitrust and competition
(accessed May 2020)
EU Relations Law, A missing piece of the puzzle: a Competition Law Cooperation
Agreement between the UK and EU (accessed May 2021)

16 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

comparison with the Canadian and Japanese agreements, it discusses
the role (and protection) of public monopolies and enterprises in more
detail. The agreement is not subject to wider arrangements for dispute
resolution.
The “continuity” trade agreements the UK has signed with Canada,
Japan and South Korea largely replicate the competition provisions in
the EU agreements. 20

20

For Canada, see UK-Canada Trade Continuity Agreement, 9 December 2020, p18
Ch17; for Japan, see House of Lords EU Committee, Scrutiny of international
agreements: UK-Japan Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, 19
November 2020, p26 para 80; for South Korea, see Continuing the UK’s trade
relationship with the Republic of Korea, September 2019, p32 para 111

17 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

3. Subsidy control
3.1 Negotiating positions
Background
Subsidy control was one of the most controversial areas during
negotiations over the TCA and one of the last issues to be resolved.
Both the EU and UK have a mutual interest in robust controls of state
support to businesses, which could ensure fair competition and trade
with the other party. Despite this, both sides adopted different
approaches to future cooperation on state aid/subsidies. 21 The UK
sought to protect its regulatory autonomy and avoid provisions in this
area that would go further than free trade agreements “normally” do.
The EU saw alignment on state aid rules as essential to prevent UK
subsidies to industries from threating to undercut EU businesses in the
future.

UK position
As an EU Member State, the UK was part of the EU regime for state aid
(see box 1 below). While Theresa May’s Government was considering
some form of incorporation of EU state aid rules in the UK rulebook,
Boris Johnson’s Government rejected any form of alignment with the EU
in this area. Referring to the principle of sovereignty it rejected EU
influence over UK domestic policy through state aid controls. The
government also chose to use the term ‘subsidies’ instead of ‘state aid’,
which is an EU law term. 22
Box 1: EU State aid rules
As an EU Member State, the UK was part of the EU regime for state aid. The EU state aid controls are
specifically aimed at creating a level playing field for businesses in the Single Market. Under Article 107
of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, state aid is prohibited, if it threatens to distort
competition and trade between EU Member States. 23 State aid refers to national public authorities
offering grants, tax reliefs and various other forms of support, which favour specific businesses or
industries. Member States are required to get European Commission clearance before making state aid
available to businesses (ex-ante assessment). In practice, more than 90% of EU state aid is exempted
from this procedure.
See further Commons Library briefing 6775, EU State Aid Rules and WTO Subsidies Agreement

As set out in its statement of 3 February 2020 on UK/EU relationships,
the UK Government did not believe that to secure future cooperation it
was necessary to be bound by an international treaty or guided by
shared institutions in subsidies policy. Such commitments could hamper
its aspirations to develop “separate and independent policies” on state
aid. It was seeking a regime that is WTO-compliant and does not go

21

22

23

HL European Union Committee, Internal Market Sub-Committee, Uncorrected oral
evidence: The level playing field and state aid, 27 February 2020, Q8
For background on (dynamic) alignment with evolving EU state aid rules see
Commons Library briefing 8852, The UK-EU future relationship negotiations: Level
Playing Field, 19 June 2020, section 2
Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union [2012]
OJ C326, Art. 107-108

18 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

beyond the provisions included in other free trade agreements, such as
CETA.
The Government’s negotiating objectives, The future relationship with
the EU. The UK’s approach to negotiations of 27 February (Chapter 20)
stated that reciprocal commitments on subsidies should be in line with
the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures (SCM) 24
and could go beyond it regarding transparency, which would be
comparable to the EU-Japan Economic Partnership Agreement. While
the SCM Agreement covers only trade in goods, the government was
willing to extend its commitments to cover trade in services too. This
was a concession to the EU position as EU state aid rules cover all trade
and do not distinguish between goods, services or movements of
capital.
The EU’s proposal was to base the UK state aid regime on EU state aid
law. That would involve a role for the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU)
which has an exclusive competence to interpret EU law. The UK
Government consistently ruled out “any jurisdiction for the CJEU over
the UK’s laws”, or “any supranational control in any area”. 25
The UK’s draft UK-EU Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (CFTA),
had a separate chapter on subsidies (Chapter 21). The proposal referred
to WTO anti-subsidy rules as basis for cooperation on subsidies. Under
the proposed terms, both sides would agree to notify each other biannually of their subsidies. A party concerned about a subsidy adversely
affecting its interests would be able to request a consultation. The other
party would give “full and sympathetic consideration” to that request
and would use its “best endeavours” to address the adverse effects. The
provisions would not be subject to the dispute settlement procedures of
the Agreement.

EU position
From the outset of the negotiations the EU indicated that the
enforcement of state aid rules was one of its main concerns among the
level playing field obligations. Following the approach set out in the
Political Declaration, the EU’s negotiating directives required upholding
“the common high standards” with regard to state aid and other areas.
But they added a request for “corresponding high standards over time
with Union standards as a reference point”. The EU requested that EU
state aid rules apply “to and in the UK”. 26
The EU draft Agreement on the New Partnership with the United
Kingdom operationalised the positions set out in the Council’s
24

25

26

The WTO rules on state aid/ subsidies are laid out in the Agreement on Subsidies
and Countervailing Measures (SCM). This agreement frames the use of subsidies and
the actions countries can take to protect their markets from the effects of another
country’s subsidies.
UK / EU relations: Written statement, HCWS86, 3 February 2020; see also
Cabinet Office, PM meeting with EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, 8
January 2020.
EU General Affairs Council, Directives for the negotiation of a new partnership with
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 5870/20, 25 Feb 2020,
para 96

19 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

negotiating directives. 27 The draft text on state aid required the UK to
give effect to EU state aid law including future amendments in its
domestic law.
Further, the UK would be required to establish an independent
enforcement authority.
The UK would also have been required to ensure that its courts could
apply state aid rules and could refer questions of interpretation of EU
state aid law to the CJEU. In addition, the European Commission would
have legal standing before UK courts to bring cases in respect of state
aid measures adopted by UK authorities and would have a right to
intervene in cases. These provisions would give EU law an
unprecedented extra-territorial effect in a third country. 28
Disagreements would be settled through a consultation mechanism
within the Specialised Committee on Level Playing Field and
Sustainability (SCLPF) and the agreement’s overarching dispute
settlement mechanism would apply.
The EU would be able to take “interim measures” if, for example,
consultations failed or the SCLPF could not come to an agreement on
whether the UK had adopted new EU state aid provisions. 29
Agreements between the EU and third countries include varying degrees
of commitments on state aid/subsidy controls. Generally, the closer the
market integration, the more state aid or anti-subsidy rules form part of
the agreement. 30 The EU’s initial proposal compared to the EU-Ukraine
Association Agreement, with the trading partner having its own
independent regime which is based on full application of EU state aid
rules. As stated above, the UK proposal was to follow the agreements
building on the WTO rules-based systems such as CETA and the EUJapan Economic Partnership Agreement which have relatively week
enforcement provisions. 31

Seeking a compromise
Throughout the first months of negotiations the UK and EU positions on
state aid remained deadlocked. However in July 2020 the EU signalled
willingness to drop its demand that the UK accepts future EU state aid
rules (dynamic alignment) and CJEU oversight. 32 In exchange it expected
the UK to sign up to a “shared philosophy” on future subsidy policy in
combination with some form of equivalence mechanism where the UK

27

28

29

30

31

32

European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership
between the European Union and the United Kingdom, UKTF(2020)14, 18 March
2020, Title III, Chapter Two, Section 1
Nikos Lavranos, EU UK agreement: an analysis of the EU’s proposed dispute
settlement provisions, Borderlex, 23 March 2020
The text did not explain the nature of such interim measures, but common
understanding was that they would refer to tariffs on goods or (partial) suspension
of the agreement. This is similar to ‘remedial measures’ included in the TCA.
Morris Schonberg, “Continuity or change? State aid control in a post-Brexit United
Kingdom”, Competition Law Journal, 47, 2017, p54
See further Commons Library briefing 9025, UK subsidy policy: first steps, 19
October 2020, section 4
“The hard Brexit choices that could yet deliver a deal,” Financial Times, 27 July 2020

20 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

would have a solid framework and an independent institution to
oversee it.
The UK Government reiterated in a statement on subsidy policy on 9
September 2020, that from 2021, the UK will no longer follow EU state
aid rules but the WTO rules on subsidies. It will honour its obligations
regarding subsidies included in its future free trade agreements. The
government also reassured that it did not intend to adopt “1970s
policies” of bailing out unsustainable companies. 33
The government’s statement of 9 September sat alongside the UK
Internal Market Bill which was introduced in Parliament on the same
day. The Bill as presented would empower Ministers to unilaterally
reinterpret and disapply provisions on state aid in the Withdrawal
Agreement Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland. It appeared that these
controversial provisions could break the UK’s legal obligations under the
Withdrawal Agreement and international law to enact the Protocol. In
response, the European Commission launched infringement
proceedings against the UK. The provisions were eventually removed
from the Bill, which has now become the UK Internal Market Act, but
these developments put further pressure on the negotiations. See for
background Commons Library Briefing United Kingdom Internal Market
Bill 2019-21, 14 September 2020, Sections 6.5 and 6.8.
On 7 October, The UK’s Chief negotiator David Frost confirmed to the
House of Lords EU Committee that the EU had dropped the request of
dynamic alignment with EU state aid rules. He disclosed that the UK had
submitted a proposal on basic principles on subsidy policy. These
principles focussed on transparency and proportionality of subsidies and
would have regard for the effect of subsidies on trade and investment.
Frost confirmed that the UK was willing to commit to such common
principles, which are “important parts of a good subsidy system”. But
the level of detail on domestic policy, that the EU had been asking for,
was to be decided after a domestic consultation followed by a possible
legislative process. 34 Thus, the domestic setup of the UK subsidy system
could not be part of the negotiation. A path to a compromise was
emerging.

3.2 The TCA: Definitions and scope
Subsidy control provisions are covered in Chapter 3, Articles 363-375.
The Agreement requires both UK and EU to have an effective system of
subsidy control with an independent body to oversee it from 1 January
2021. Crucially, the UK has the right to regulate; it may determine the
precise scope of its regime, within the principles and rules agreed in the
TCA.

33

34

The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy (BEIS), Government sets
out plans for new approach to subsidy control, 9 September 2020
HL Committee on the European Union, Uncorrected oral evidence: Progress of
negotiations on the future UK-EU relationship, 7 October 2020, Q8

21 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

The TCA defines a subsidy in Article 363 without referring to concepts
of EU law, but it is seen by many as generally similar in scope. 35 A
subsidy concerns financial assistance paid from the public purse, in
various forms, including grants, loans or guarantees, foregone revenue
or provision of goods and services. Also tax measures can be subsidies in
some circumstances. A subsidy confers economic advantage and is
specific – it benefits certain economic actors above others. A subsidy
must have actual or potential effect on trade or investment between the
Parties (Article 363 (1) (b)).
Article 364 limits the scope of a “subsidy”, exempting compensations
for the damage caused by natural disasters. Lesser conditions apply to
other exceptional non-economic occurrences, such as a pandemic, and
focussed responses to global economic emergencies. It is also made
clear that subsidies of a social nature to consumers, rather than
businesses, are allowed.
There is a new de minimis threshold of roughly £335,000 below which
a subsidy is exempt. Further, the rules do not apply to agricultural and
fisheries sectors, and the audio-visual sector, which includes film,
broadcasting, and multimedia.
Article 365 provides that the principles of subsidy control do not apply
to subsidies for services of public economic interest, such as social
housing or public transport services to remote areas, if they would
obstruct the delivery of such services. Generally, authorities
compensating an entity for the service provision should be transparent,
avoid overcompensation and prevent cross-subsidising other activities
outside the scope of public interest. The subsidy control chapter of the
TCA does not apply to compensations which amount to less than
£795,000 over a period of three years.

3.3 Principles of subsidy control
Mutually agreed principles of subsidy control are covered in
Article 366, and should be applied to determine the legality of an
individual subsidy where this could have a material effect on trade or
investment between the parties. See box 2 below.
Box 2: TCA principles of subsidy control (Article 366)
Each party must have an effective system of subsidy control that ensures that the granting of a subsidy
respects the following principles:
(a) subsidies pursue a specific public policy objective to remedy an identified market failure or to
address an equity rationale such as social difficulties or distributional concerns (“the objective”)
(b) subsidies are proportionate and limited to what is necessary to achieve the objective
(c) subsidies are designed to bring about a change of economic behaviour of the beneficiary that
is conducive to achieving the objective and that would not be achieved in the absence of
subsidies being provided
(d) subsidies should not normally compensate for the costs the beneficiary would have funded in
the absence of any subsidy

35

Phedon Nicolaides, One Agreement, Two Parallel Systems: Subsidies in the Trade
and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and the UK, lexxion.eu, 5 January
2021

22 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

(e) subsidies are an appropriate policy instrument to achieve a public policy objective and that
objective cannot be achieved through other less distortive means
(f) subsidies’ positive contributions to achieving the objective outweigh any negative effects, in
particular the negative effects on trade or investment between the parties.

Certain subsidies that have or could have material effect on UKEU trade, are prohibited and others are subject to conditions
(Article 367). The prohibited subsidies include unlimited state
guarantees, and state support to rescue ailing or insolvent businesses
without a realistic restructuring plan. However, such subsidies would be
permitted in order to avoid social hardship, job losses or service
disruption. Subsidies to banks and credit institutions are allowed subject
to a credible restructuring plan and a prospect of long-term viability.
Exports subsidies for goods and services are prohibited, with some
exceptions such as export credit guarantees. Also subsidies conditional
on domestic content are prohibited. Subsidies to air carriers are allowed
in exceptional circumstances.
Article 367 (13) sets out specific rules for large cross-border or
international cooperation projects. Article 367 (14) regulates subsidies
to sustainable energy and environmental sustainability.
Phedon Nikolaides, Professor of European economic law at Maastricht
University has noted that the TCA allows subsidies that contribute to
public policy objectives:
Without explicitly stating so, [the TCA] allows subsidies that
pursue a public policy objective, comply with certain principles,
such as those of necessity and proportionality, and generate
positive effects that outweigh their negative effects on trade and
investment. 36

In sum, “any subsidy in any form escapes from the obligations laid
down in the Agreement if it has no ‘material effect’ on trade or
investment”. 37
An additional Joint Declaration on Subsidy Control Policies covers
subsidies for the development of disadvantaged areas, transport, and
research and development. The Joint declaration provides non-legally
binding guidance on what “appropriate subsidy policies” in these areas
would entail. For example, beneficiaries of subsidies for the
development of disadvantaged or deprived areas should be required to
provide substantial contribution to the investment costs of a project.
Also, the main purpose of regional aid should not be attracting
businesses to relocate from the EU to the UK or vice versa. George
Peretz QC of Monckton Chambers assesses:
The value of these latter declarations is largely to make it clear
that the UK government, committed to major investment in both
transport and R&D, can do so within the framework of the

36

37

Phedon Nicolaides, One Agreement, Two Parallel Systems: Subsidies in the Trade
and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and the UK, lexxion.eu, 5 January
2021
Ibid

23 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

Agreement – though it will be observed that it could also have
done so within the framework of EU State aid rules. 38

Transparency
The Parties commit to principles of transparency around subsidy
controls (Article 369), agreeing to make information on individual
subsidies and the names of recipients available on a public database or
website. For this purpose, the UK Government has set up a new
transparency database on gov.uk. The UK has also agreed to ensure
that an interested party – for example a competitor of the beneficiary or
a trade association – which intends to apply for a court review of a
subsidy, has access to the relevant information about the subsidy. This
would enable it to assess the application of the subsidy control
principles of Article 366 and make an informed decision about its claim
and the issues at stake. The transparency provisions are more profound
than the commitments in FTA’s like CETA.
Box 3: UK Guidance and future Subsidy Control Bill
On 31 December 2020, the government published guidance for public authorities which award
subsidies, explaining their responsibility for the assessment of compliance with the UK’s international
commitments on subsidy control. 39
A consultation about the design of a bespoke approach to UK domestic subsidy control ran from 3
February until 31 March 2021.
The UK Internal Market Act (Section 52) reserves to the UK Parliament the exclusive ability to legislate
for a subsidy control regime. Later this year, the government is expected to bring forward a Subsidy
Control Bill to establish a subsidy control system in domestic law.

3.4 Independent enforcement body
The TCA subsidy provisions require that the UK establishes an
“operationally independent” enforcement authority (Article 371)
with an “appropriate role”. The Agreement does not require the
government to assess subsidies in advance, or introduce a standstill
period until a subsidy is cleared, as the EU state aid regime requires. So
far the UK Government has not set up a subsidy control authority.

3.5 The role of courts
Besides an independent enforcement body, Article 372 requires that the
courts are competent
•

to review subsidy decisions taken by granting authorities or the
independent body,

•

to hear claims from interested parties, and

•

to impose effective remedies, in accordance with either party’s
domestic law.

38

George Peretz, The subsidy control provisions of the UK-EU trade and cooperation
agreement: a framework for a new UK domestic subsidy regime, Monckton
Chambers, 28 December 2020
HM Government, Guidance Complying with the UK’s international obligations on
subsidy control, 31 December 2021, para 3.2

39

24 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

That means a case can be brought through the domestic legal system of
either side rather than through an arbitration procedure of the TCA. A
unique feature is that, with the permission of the court, either party can
intervene in the other’s domestic court proceedings. This is a weakened
down provision from the EU’s initial proposal to have legal standing to
bring cases before UK courts. Further, both parties must put a
mechanism in place to recover subsidies which have been successfully
challenged before a court. However, if a subsidy is granted by an Act of
Parliament, recovery will not be required (Article 373).

3.6 Dispute settlement and remedies
The Agreement contains a complex set of bespoke provisions to address
disputes on subsidies. First, there is the option of a consultation. If a
consultation does not solve the dispute, a complaining party can take
unilateral remedial measures, subject to arbitration. When a dispute
relates to concerns over significant divergence of the subsidy control
policy, parties can take rebalancing measures.
A consultation procedure is established under Article 370. It allows a
party to request information on how the subsidy control principles of
Article 366 have been respected in an individual case, if it considers that
a subsidy (potentially) has a negative effect on trade or investment
between the UK and EU. The party can escalate the case, requesting
consultations within the Trade Specialised Committee on Level Playing
Field for Open and Fair Competition and Sustainable Development
which “shall make every attempt to arrive at a mutually satisfactory
resolution of the matter”. This consultation procedure, notes Kotsonis,
“should also help flush out any potential concerns over the compliance
of a subsidy that could otherwise escalate into a dispute”. 40
In more concerning instances, if either party considers that the other’s
individual subsidy presents a serious risk of causing “a significant
negative effect on trade or investment between the parties,” it can
request information and consultations under the Article 374 Remedial
measures procedure. 41
If there is evidence to that serious risk, a party can “unilaterally take
appropriate remedial measures.” These measures have to be limited to
what is strictly necessary and proportionate. Articles 374 (5) and 374 (6)
stipulate that the existence of a serious risk of a significant negative
effect must be backed by facts and reliable evidence, and not merely
based on “allegation, conjecture or remote possibility”.
The other party can challenge the complainant’s remedial measures if it
considers them excessive, and request a ruling of an arbitration tribunal
in accordance with the Part Six provisions on dispute settlement. The
tribunal will assess whether the remedial measure of the complainant is
proportionate. If the complainant fails to comply with the arbitration
40

41

Totis Kotsonis, “The Squaring of the Circle: Subsidy Control Under the UK-EU Trade
and Cooperation Agreement”, European State Aid Law Quarterly, Volume 20, Issue
1, 2021, pp561-575
The Partnership Council may maintain an illustrative list of what might amount to a
significant negative effect on trade or investment (Article 374 (7)).

25 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

ruling, the other party can take remedial action in response. The
arbitration tribunal will conduct its proceedings in accordance with
Article 760 which sets outs an expedited process for establishing the
tribunal and for the delivery of the tribunal’s final ruling. 42
Article 375 sets out that if one of the parties more generally fails to
comply with the subsidy commitments of the TCA, the other may refer
the matter to the horizontal dispute settlement procedure of the TCA
(Title 1, Part Six). This does not apply to provisions on the independent
body (Article 371) and courts (Article 372). An arbitration tribunal under
the TCA will have no jurisdiction over the assessment and recovery of
individual subsidies.
The rebalancing mechanism (Article 411) applies to the TCA
commitments on subsidies (see section 8.5 below), in a similar manner it
applies to labour and social, environmental standards or climate
protection. The rebalancing mechanism provides that the parties can
take “rebalancing measures” where significant divergence between the
UK and the EU on subsidy control gives rise to “material impacts on
trade and investment between the parties”. A remedial measure and a
rebalancing measure cannot be applied at the same time to remedy the
impact of the same subsidy (Article 374 (15)).
Both remedial measures and rebalancing procedures for subsidies
require that the assessment of a subsidy’s impacts must be based on
“reliable evidence and not merely on conjecture or remote possibility.”
Kotsonis summarises the differences between the remedies under the
two procedures:
In terms of substance, there would not appear to be any material
differences between what might count as ‘remedial’ or ‘rebalancing’
measure; both might involve the imposition of tariffs or quotas or the
suspension of certain other preferential access commitments. However,
on the basis that significant divergence in subsidy control policies would
herald a systemic divergence in the way in which Parties approach
subsidy control, this is likely to lead to longer term and wider distortive
effects on level playing field conditions than the grant of any one or
more time-limited subsidies. Accordingly, where a rebalancing measure
is justified, this would seem to permit, in principle, the adoption of more
draconian trade defence measures than that which would seem
justifiable in the context of a remedial measure. 43
In critique of the dispute settlement mechanism for subsidies, Nicolaides
has pointed out that the system of remedial measures available to a

42

43

For a detailed description of the subsidy dispute resolution procedure see Commons
Library briefing 9139, The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: governance
and dispute settlement, section 5.1
Totis Kotsonis, “The Squaring of the Circle: Subsidy Control Under the UK-EU Trade
and Cooperation Agreement,” European State Aid Law Quarterly, Volume 20, Issue
1, 2021, p571

26 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

party in response to the other’s harmful subsidies is “an inefficient
system because it counters one distortion by creating another”. 44
The review mechanism described in section 8.8 below also applies to
subsidies, making it possible to review or ultimately suspend the Trade
title of the agreement if rebalancing measures have been taken too
frequently.
In addition to the above dispute resolution procedures, with regard to
trade in goods, Article 32 contains provisions on anti-dumping and
countervailing measures which can be used to remedy the effects of
harmful subsidies of the other party. 45 Article 32 states that antidumping and countervailing measures are to be applied in accordance
with the provisions of the WTO SCM Agreement, which allows for
investigations into the effects of subsidised imports on the domestic
prices and industry. Countervailing measures can be introduced to
offset the injury caused to domestic industry.

3.7 Issues and commentary
A compromise solution
There is a consensus among state aid/subsidy law specialists that the UK
has done well in the negotiations in achieving independence from EU
state aid rules and the jurisdiction of the CJEU. 46
At the same time, the TCA subsidy provisions are, as professor Kenneth
Armstrong puts it, a “delicately balanced” compromise with the EU
objectives. The provisions are not as thin as the UK sought in terms of
the WTO SCM Agreement. Instead, “the Agreement itself is the direct
source of detailed substantive definitions of what constitutes a subsidy,
certain prohibitions and any exceptions.”47 The resulting regime is
substantially more robust than if the system was based merely on the
WTO anti-subsidy commitments, and imports the EU approach to
assessment of subsidies, argues subsidy law expert Totis Kotsonis.
[I]n providing that subsidies should be granted only when they are
consistent with the Subsidy Principles, the TCA imports an
approach which is aligned with the assessment which the
European Commission itself carries out in determining State aid
compatibility with the internal market under EU law. 48

44

45
46

47

48

Phedon Nicolaides, One Agreement, Two Parallel Systems: Subsidies in the Trade
and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and the UK, lexxion.eu, 5 January
2021
TCA, Title I Trade in Goods, Chapter 1, Article 32 Trade remedies
See for example, Emily Lydgate et al., Phedon Nicolaides, James Webber, George
Peretz, Marley Morris
Kenneth Armstrong, An Uneven ‘Level Playing Field’ – the EU/UK Trade Agreement,
University of Cambridge, 19 January 2021 (accessed May 2021)
Totis Kotsonis, “The Squaring of the Circle: Subsidy Control Under the UK-EU Trade
and Cooperation Agreement”, European State Aid Law Quarterly, Volume 20, Issue
1, 2021, p574

27 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

While consciously avoiding direct reference to concepts of EU law, the
resulting regime is in substance, if not in form, rather similar to the
structure under the EU State aid rules. 49
The resulting TCA provisions are a new model of managing divergence,
unprecedented in any other free trade agreement. International Trade
Committee was told that the TCA would not limit the UK’s freedom to
negotiate new free trade agreements with third countries. The TCA sets
a high bar, which the UK would have no intension to surpass with third
countries. 50
Flexibility in deciding policy priorities
The UK has achieved significant freedom in various policy areas
previously regulated by specific EU state aid rules. The Sussex University
Trade Policy Observatory (UKTPO) notes:
The UK […] has negotiated for higher de minimis and public
service subsidy thresholds, for special provisions to allow for a
post-COVID19 special recovery programme to level up regions
and to be able to keep a check on how the Member States of the
EU use public money to stimulate their economies. It has also
ensured that general provisions relating to tax and infrastructure
projects will not be caught by the subsidy rules and that the
dispute mechanisms that address problems with EU state aid and
UK subsidies are independent of the European Commission and
the European Courts. 51

In policy areas such as environment and energy, research &
development, or support for SMEs, where the UK has strong interests
and towards which it has directed state aid in the past, the provisions of
the TCA are general or absent, whereas the corresponding provisions in
EU rules are much more complex. It can be argued that the UK will be
able to grant larger subsidies to its companies without breaching the
TCA in comparison to those which are allowed in the EU . 52 The
threshold to demonstrate that a subsidy harms trade and investment is
higher under the TCA than under EU rules.
Independence from the EU regime could present an opportunity to the
UK to make its domestic subsidy controls more permissive and
efficient. 53 James Webber, partner at Shearman & Sterling writes in
Taking advantage of the opportunity presented by the UK’s new subsidy
control regime (27 January 2021) that the UK can now, for example:

49

50

51

52

53

George Peretz, The subsidy control provisions of the UK-EU trade and cooperation
agreement: a framework for a new UK domestic subsidy regime, Monckton
Chambers, 28 December 2020
International Trade Committee, Oral evidence: UK-EU trading relationship, HC 1206,
22 April 2021, Q119-120
E. Lydgate, E. Szyszczak, L. A. Winters, C. Anthony, Taking Stock of the UK-EU Trade
and Cooperation Agreement: Governance, State Subsidies and the Level Playing
Field, UKTPO, Briefing Paper 54, January 2021; See also
Phedon Nicolaides, One Agreement, Two Parallel Systems: Subsidies in the Trade
and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and the UK, lexxion.eu, 5 January
2021 (accessed May 2021)
George Peretz, The subsidy control provisions of the UK-EU trade and cooperation
agreement: a framework for a new UK domestic subsidy regime, Monckton
Chambers, 28 December 2020

28 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

•

simplify and speed up approvals for productivity-enhancing projects,
helping to attract globally mobile inward investment,

•

improve research and development collaboration, enhancing the
UK’s competitiveness, and

•

enable regional fiscal policy to support regional investment and the
Government’s levelling up agenda.

The bar of demonstrating that a subsidy has “material effect” on trade
under the TCA and is therefore out of bounds, is high. The Government
would therefore consider the effects of a subsidy within the UK when
deciding whether to spend the money in the first place. 54
Uncertainty about domestic effects
TCA subsidy provisions leave much of the internal settlement open to
the UK Government’s discretion. There’s a degree of uncertainty about
how the new UK commitments on subsidies will be implemented in
practice and what these changes will mean for specific policy areas.
Finding the balance between flexibility under the TCA and certainty for
public authorities and businesses benefitting from subsidies may not be
easy. 55
For example, the TCA does not require the UK independent authority to
assess the compliance of individual support measures – a role which was
previously performed by the European Commission. The resulting
uncertainty about individual subsidies could be addressed by introducing
general block exemptions for certain types of subsidies. Experts argue
that without such guidance, the burden on granting authorities would
require resources and expertise to assess compliance and would still
leave authorities open to legal challenge. 56
Kotsonis notes that the current UK subsidy system “lack[s] any
consideration for a subsidy’s potentially distortive effects on competition
in the UK internal market,” or the UK internal subsidy competition, as
opposed to competition with the EU. This issue may be clarified in the
government’s legislative proposals for UK subsidy control which are
expected after the results of the recent consultation have been
published. 57
See box 3 above and Commons Library Briefing 9139, UK subsidy
policy: first steps for the issues facing the independent UK state aid
regime.
Mutual controls of implementation
While TCA provisions are bound to constrain UK domestic policy to
some extent, the UK Government has mechanisms to monitor EU
54

55

56

57

James Webber, Taking advantage of the opportunity presented by the UK’s new
subsidy control regime, Shearman & Sterling, January 2021 (accessed May 2021)
Fiona Wishlade, Where is the UK on State Aid and Subsidy Control Post Brexit?
University of Strathclyde Publishing, February 2021, Chapter 10
Totis Kotsonis, The Squaring of the Circle: Subsidy Control Under the UK-EU Trade
and Cooperation Agreement, European State Aid Law Quarterly, Volume 20, Issue
1, 2021, pp573-4; Jonathan Branton and Alexander Rose have made similar
proposals in UK Government launches consultation on new Subsidy Control rules, 4
February 2021 (accessed May 2021)
Prime Minister’s Office, The Queen’s speech 2021, p72

29 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

subsidies. As described above in section 1.4, the European Parliament is
seeking assurances that “significant divergence with material impact on
trade or investment is broadly interpreted” and that the enforcement
mechanisms work in practice. It has specifically noted that provisions on
the level playing field apply to UK Government’s plans such as the
freeports programme. But, as the International Trade Committee heard
from James Webber, if EU subsidies have an adverse effect on the UK,
the EU will have to consider that to a much greater degree than it
would have to consider it in respect of any other third country. 58
The effect on the Northern Ireland Protocol
The TCA provisions on subsidies in the Agreement do not amend the
state aid provisions (Article 10) of the Withdrawal Agreement Protocol
on Ireland and Northern Ireland. Under the Protocol, in order to prevent
undue distortion of competition and trade, EU state aid rules continue
to apply to subsidies that affect goods and the wholesale electricity
market, insofar as these can affect trade between Northern Ireland and
the EU. Experts generally agree that the application of Article 10 of the
Protocol alongside the TCA can create legal and practical issues in the
future.
State aid/subsidy experts have pointed out that under EU state aid rules,
the Northern Ireland Protocol could also be interpreted as applying
further than just Northern Ireland and covering business support in
Great Britain. George Peretz QC & Alfred Artley have explained:
EU state aid rules do not simply bite upon acts of the devolved
and local government bodies in Northern Ireland, and those
measures adopted by the UK government that are Northern
Ireland-specific; rather they also catch all-UK measures (or
measures affecting only part of the UK), whatever UK authority
takes those measures, as long as they meet the test. 59

For example, a UK-wide tax measure, benefitting a NI business might be
caught by the EU state aid enforcement regime as it could potentially
affect trade between NI and the EU. 60 This is often referred to as
“reach-back” of EU state aid rules.
The EU sought to address UK concerns about the “reach-back” of the
Protocol’s state aid provisions, by giving a clarification in a unilateral
declaration in the Withdrawal Agreement Joint Committee on Article
10(1) of the Protocol. However, the issue is not settled and the UK and
EU views of the extent of “reach-back” appear to diverge. The UK
Government’s Technical Guidance on subsidy control (paragraph 7.1)
points out that the “reach-back” situation could arise in certain, limited
circumstances. But the European Commission’s Notice to Stakeholders
on state aid after the departure of the UK from shows a wide

58

59

60

International Trade Committee, Oral evidence: UK-EU trading relationship, HC 1206,
22 April 2021, Q126
George Peretz QC, Alfred Artley, State aid under the Northern Ireland Protocol, Tax
Journal, 15 May 2020
EU powers to review UK state aid under Irish Border Protocol to be assessed 'case by
case', MLex, 24 January 2020; G.Peretz QC in “Boris Johnson’s efforts to escape EU
state aid rules ‘mistaken’”, Financial Times, 9 February 2020;

30 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

interpretation of which measures can “affect trade” between Northern
Ireland and the EU. 61
Experts have argued that co-existence of the two subsidy regimes in the
UK may cause confusion and uncertainty for UK public authorities and
companies. Some have called for the Protocol’s state aid provisions to
be replaced for the TCA regime during the negotiations or at some
point in the future. 62
See Commons Library Briefing UK subsidy policy: first steps, section 2.3
for further detail on state aid provisions in the Northern Ireland Protocol.

61

62

European Commission Notice to stakeholders, Withdrawal of the United Kingdom
and EU rules in the field of state aid, 18 January 2021
See for example George Peretz, The UK’s new subsidy regime: a marsh of
uncertainty, Monckton Chambers, 1 January 2021;
James Webber, International Trade Committee, Oral evidence: UK-EU trading
relationship, HC 1206, 22 April 2021, Q119

31 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

4. State-owned enterprises and
designated monopolies
4.1 Negotiating positions
The issues around state owned enterprises were not contentious during
the negotiations as both the UK and EU agree that state-owned
enterprises and companies with special rights should not engage in anticompetitive practices or discriminatory and abusive behaviour creating
barriers to trade and investment. Provisions on state-owned enterprises
and designated monopolies put private businesses on an equal footing
with businesses where the governments are involved. They ensure that
provisions on fair competition in the agreement are not undermined by
the unfair behaviour of such companies when they engage in
commercial activities.
In their draft agreement texts, both the UK and EU proposed largely
similar commitments on state-owned enterprises, which were in line
with existing EU FTAs, including CETA (Chapter 18) and the EU-Japan
Economic Partnership Agreement (Chapter 13).
The proposed obligations would address anti-competitive behaviours of
state-owned enterprises, designated monopolies (sole suppliers of a
particular service) and commercial enterprises to which public bodies
have granted special rights in order to perform particular services. The
latter can refer to services such as energy, water, public transport or
certain social services, which public authorities contract out to private
businesses but financially support their provision.

Background
With growing global participation of state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in
cross-border trade and investment, various countries have moved to
support effective competition among all market participants, both
publicly and privately owned. There are, for example, initiatives in the
framework of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD). The principle of competitive neutrality, central to
this policy area, implies that companies are not advantaged (or
disadvantaged) on the market solely because of their ownership or
nationality. In the recent years, stand-alone chapters on state-owned
enterprises have been included in free trade agreements. 63
The EU has its own rules on state-owned enterprises and entities
entrusted with certain public services. Their core principle is that such
enterprises are subject to competition and state aid rules in the same
way as any other business to the extent these rules do not obstruct their
ability to perform the services entrusted to them. 64

63

64

Minwoo Kim, Regulating the Visible Hands: Development of Rules on State-Owned
Enterprises in Trade Agreements, Harvard International Law Journal, Vol. 58, No 1,
2017
OECD, Competitive Neutrality and state-owned enterprises: challenges and policy
options, OECD Corporate governance working papers, 2011, p12

32 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

4.2 The TCA
In line with the proposals brought forward during the negotiations,
Chapter 4, Articles 376-382, of the TCA covers state-owned enterprises,
enterprises granted special privileges, and designated monopolies
(‘covered entities’). When carrying out commercial activities these
enterprises must act in accordance with commercial considerations and
may not discriminate against goods, services or entities of the other
party (Article 380).
The TCA refers back to relevant international standards, including the
OECD Guidelines on Corporate Governance of State-Owned Enterprises,
which each party shall respect (Article 381).
Chapter 4 does not apply to enterprises if the size of their revenues
derived from commercial activities is below a defined threshold. 65 In
addition, the provisions do not apply when covered enterprises
(Article 377):
•

act as procuring entities, that is, buyers in government procurement,

•

supply services in exercise of government authority,

•

provide certain financial services (for example offering export and
investment support, mandated by the government), or

•

provide audio-visual services or some other services.

Each party commits to having an independent and impartial regulatory
body (Article 381).
Article 382 sets out the mechanism to exchange information between
the parties in case one has reasons to believe that its interests are being
adversely affected by the commercial activities of a covered entity.
Relevant to fair competition between publicly owned and commercial
enterprises are the provisions on subsidy control that apply to services of
public economic interest (Article 365). They limit market-distorting
advantages such as excessive government subsidies for a public service,
which a company could use to boost its commercial activities.
The UK Government’s assessment of the provisions is that they make
the best use of international standards when regulating them, in line
with provisions in other FTAs.
Recognising the increasing impact on trade of state-owned companies
in a number of countries, both sides also support new or improved
international trade rules to capture any market-distorting behaviour of
state-owned enterprises and promote competitive neutrality.66

65

66

100 million Special Drawing Rights in any one of the three previous consecutive
fiscal years
Department for International Trade Press Release Britain is back: Liz Truss calls for
new rules at WTO to tackle unfair trade practices, 3 March 2020; European
Commission Communication, Trade Policy Review - An Open, Sustainable and
Assertive Trade Policy, Annex COM(2021) 66 final, 18 February 2021, pp8-9

33 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

5. Taxation
5.1 Negotiating positions
Background
While the TCA was being negotiated it was generally assumed that any
future UK-EU agreement would not contain any substantive provisions
regarding tax.
Historically, taxation has remained largely a Member State competence.
The major exception to this generalisation is indirect tax: primarily VAT –
for which there is a substantive body of EU law establishing common
rules across Member States – and, to a lesser extent, excise duties. There
are no equivalent provisions with regard to other taxes, though all
national legislation has to comply with the overarching provisions of the
Treaty guaranteeing the free movement of goods, persons, services and
capital across the Single Market and prohibiting discrimination. 67
Concerns about the scale of tax avoidance and evasion, both across the
EU and internationally, have resulted in the introduction of a number of
EU instruments relating to administrative cooperation to exchange
information and help tackle tax evasion.
The Protocol on Ireland/Northern Ireland in the draft Withdrawal
Agreement agreed in November 2018 included level playing field
commitments regarding taxation, though, in comparison to other areas,
these were relatively brief and appear to have been uncontroversial.
Both parties committed to implementing the principles of good
governance in the area of taxation, including global standards on
transparency and exchange of information, fair taxation and OECD
standards against Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS). 68 The UK
stated that it would continue to apply its domestic law which transposes
EU Directives on the exchange of information on taxation (Directive
2011/16), anti-tax avoidance rules (Directive 2016/1164), and countryby-country-reporting by credit institutions and investment firms
(Directive 2013/36). Finally the UK reaffirmed its commitment to curb
harmful tax measures as defined in the EU Code of Conduct for
business taxation (a political agreement, as opposed to a legal
instrument, agreed in 1997). 69
The revised Political Declaration, agreed in October 2019, mentioned
taxation in its discussion of level playing field provisions, noting that the
parties should “commit to the principles of good governance in the area
of taxation and to the curbing of harmful tax practices”. 70

67

68

69
70

For more details see, HM Government, Taxation report: review of the balance of
competences, 28 November 2012
For more details see, Commons Library briefing 5945, Corporate Tax Reform 20102020, 2 April 2021, section 6.2
Withdrawal Agreement and Political Declaration, 25 November 2018, pp353-4
Political Declaration setting out the framework for the future relationship between
the European Union and the United Kingdom, 19 October 2019, para 77. An
overview of the EU initiatives to tackle harmful tax competition is provided on the
Commission’s site (accessed May 2021).

34 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

EU position
The EU’s draft future relationship agreement confirmed its view that a
commitment to “implement the principles of good governance in the
area of taxation” should feature in a future UK-EU agreement, and that
at the end of the transition period the UK should apply common
standards to those applicable in the EU in a number of tax-related areas:
•

the exchange of information on income, financial accounts, crossborder tax rulings, country-by-country reports between tax
administrations, beneficial ownership and potential cross-border tax
planning arrangements,

•

rules against tax avoidance practices, and

•

public country-by-country reporting by credit institutions and
investment firms.

The EU proposed that the Partnership Council (see section 8) could
modify the common standards in order to include additional areas or to
lay down higher standards. 71

UK position
The Government’s draft Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement set out
the UK’s general commitment to good tax governance (not subject to
any dispute resolution mechanism), omitting the EU’s supplementary
requirement for non-regression on certain aspects of tax. 72
There was little material change in either party’s position on this issue
following the Commission’s draft negotiating directive in February
2020, 73 and the UK Government’s negotiating objectives which
followed it. In the latter case the negotiating objectives simply noted
that “the Agreement could include commitments to the principles of
good tax governance as reflected in international standards,” but
“should not constrain tax sovereignty in any manner”. 74
In his assessment of the level playing field published in March 2020, the
IPPR’s Marley Morris took the view that in the area of tax, the UK
“would probably seek to water down the proposals for the UK to follow
specific areas of EU law, given this conflicts with the UK’s position of
regulatory autonomy” although “there is most likely greater scope for
compromise than in competition and state aid policy, given any
disagreement here would relate to a relatively limited area of EU law”. 75

71

72

73

74

75

European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, UKTF (2020) 14, 18 March 2020 pp32-3
HM Government, Draft UK-EU Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (CFTA), 19
May 2020, p259
See European Commission, Recommendation for a Council Decision authorising the
opening of negotiations for a new partnership with the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, COM(2020) 35, 3 February 2020, paras. 94-5
HM Government, The Future Relationship with the EU: The UK’s Approach to
Negotiations, CP211, 27 February 2020 p17
Marley Morris, Negotiating the level playing field, IPPR, 5 March 2020, p14

35 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

David Frost, the UK’s chief Brexit negotiator, gave evidence to the
House of Lords EU Select Committee on 28 May 2020. Asked what the
EU proposes beyond non-regression, regarding taxation he said:
Tax is a bit different; it is not normally part of an FTA in quite this
way. [The EU] are proposing commitment to good governance
and OECD standards, where we do not have a big difference
between us, of course. They are proposing non-regression on
three specific tax measures about anti-avoidance, which really
equate to EU directives, again policed by a dispute settlement
mechanism that involves the European Court of Justice. We have
some problems with that aspect of this. Generally on tax we have
similar principles, as you would expect. 76

5.2 The TCA
As anticipated the TCA only briefly deals with taxation (Chapter 5:
Articles 383-5). The agreement retained the commitment to good
governance (Article 383), although the Commission’s proposal that this
refer to EU Code of Conduct, as well as the relevant OECD provisions,
was dropped. The agreement retained provision with regard to nonregression, but referred to standards agreed at OECD level, and not EU
directives (Article 384). Finally provision to exclude this aspect of the
agreement from the general arrangements for dispute resolution was
retained (Article 385).
The European Commission’s Q&A document on the TCA provides a
summary of this section:
How will you ensure that taxation isn’t used as a means to
distort competition?
The Parties agreed on a good governance clause and
commitments to uphold the taxation standards on exchange of
tax information, anti-tax avoidance, and public tax transparency.
These provisions are based on international standards, including
OECD standards, related to the exchange of tax information; rules
on interest limitation, controlled foreign companies and hybrid
mismatches, as well as on the Party’s domestic standards related
to public country-by-country reporting.
In addition to that, the EU and the UK set out, in a separate jointdeclaration, specific principles on the countering of harmful tax
regimes and affirmed jointly their commitment to apply these
principles. They also agreed to hold an annual dialogue on their
application of these principles. 77

The joint declaration on countering harmful tax regimes is one of the
series of declarations accompanying the TCA. 78
In their overview of the TCA, the Institute for Government note, “the
commitments for taxation do not in any way prohibit the choice to
lower or raise taxes. They refer to international standards on preventing
76

77

78

HL European Union Committee, Uncorrected oral evidence: Progress of UK-EU
future relationship negotiations, 28 May 2020, Q4
European Commission, Questions & Answers: EU-UK Trade and Cooperation
Agreement, 24 December 2020
See, Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, UK/EU and EAEC: Trade and
Cooperation Agreement, CP 426, 30 April 2021 (Declarations, p2523)

36 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

tax avoidance”, adding, “the commitments are not enforceable and are
similar to what is found in other EU free trade agreements”. 79
Writing on the prospect of future tax competition between the UK and
the EU, Alison Dickie and David Haworth (Freshfields Bruckhaus
Deringer) underline that in these provisions “the key is that in each
instance it is the OECD rather than the EU understanding of these rules
that the UK has committed to maintain”. They go on to observe, in
relation to the joint declaration that, “it is understood that the EU’s
aim” in concluding this “was to replicate the EU code of conduct on
business taxation”:
This is not currently binding on EU Member States which would
seem to explain the rationale for including this as a less onerous
commitment in a political declaration separate to the TCA.
Nonetheless, it is expected that this will be sufficient to ensure the
UK does not undo BEPS related changes to its patent box regime
in a bid to attract IP heavy businesses to the UK. 80

The writers concluded that part from the restrictions imposed by the
TCA “opportunities remain” for the UK to make its tax regime more
competitive but that it seemed “likely that divergences” between the
two regimes “will in any event develop over time”. 81
In its summary document on the TCA the Government made a few
observations on these provisions (emphasis added):
Chapter 5: Taxation
88. The Agreement commits both Parties to uphold global
standards on tax transparency and fighting tax avoidance (which
the UK has played a leading role in developing and implementing
through the G20 and OECD). It contains commitments to specific
tax standards as they stand at the end of the transition period,
including the international standards on exchange of information,
anti-tax avoidance, as well as relevant standards in legislation on
public country by country reporting by credit-institutions and
investment firms.
89. The commitments on tax between the UK and the EU are also
captured in a stand-alone Joint Political Declaration on Countering
Harmful Tax Regimes. This is a political commitment to the
principles of countering harmful tax regimes, and reflects the
work done by the OECD in this area.
90. There are no provisions constraining our domestic tax
regime or tax rates. 82

79

80

81

82

Institute for Government, UK–EU future relationship: the deal - Level playing field
(accessed May 2021)
“Brexit: tax competition between the UK and the EU27”, Tax Journal, 12 February
2021. For more on the UK’s patent box rules and the changes made to ensure it was
BEPS-compliant see, Helen Miller & Thomas Pope, Corporation Tax Changes and
Challenges, Institute for Fiscal Studies, February 2015 pp5-6, 13-; Budget 2016,
HC901, March 2016, para 2.99; and, PQ30815, 21 March 2016.
“Brexit: tax competition between the UK and the EU27”, Tax Journal, 12 February
2021
HM Government, UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Summary, December
2020, p19

37 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

Writing in the British Tax Review Alice Pirlot (Research Fellow (Law) at
the Oxford University Centre for Business Taxation) argued that “this
statement should be nuanced”:
The UK Government is right that the taxation chapter does not
add any substance to the UK commitments in terms of standards
and rules agreed in the OECD.
However, the taxation chapter provides an additional legal basis
for these commitments. The taxation chapter also carries a
symbolic value, which is in line with the EU Good Tax Governance
Agenda. Article 5.1 of the TCA on “[g]ood governance” almost
reproduces the EU standard provision on good tax governance for
agreements with third countries issued by the Council of the
European Union in June 2018. 83
From this perspective, the EU–UK TCA could pave the way for the
integration of similar provisions in future trade agreements
concluded by the EU. 84

83

84

Council conclusions on the EU standard provision on good governance in tax
matters for agreements with third countries [2018] OJ C193/5 (6 June 2018).
Alice Pirlot, “Some observations on the tax-related provisions in the EU-UK Trade
and Cooperation Agreement”, British Tax Review, issue 1, 2021 pp1-14

38 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

6. Labour and social protection
6.1 Negotiating positions
It is common for free trade agreements (FTAs) to contain provisions on
labour and social standards. The extent to which an agreement should
protect labour standards was one of the key areas of dispute during the
negotiation of the Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA).
The EU has adopted a wide range of instruments, mostly directives, on
workers’ rights. As a Member State of the EU, the UK was required to
implement these directives in domestic law. As a result, a large portion
of UK employment law is derived from EU law. For an overview, see
Commons Library briefing 9099, End of Brexit transition: Workers’
rights.
During the negotiation of the TCA, there were significant differences in
the UK and EU positions on labour and social standards. They concerned
the extent to which the parties should be prohibited from lowering
labour standards (non-regression) and whether one party should have to
raise its standards if the other party chose to raise theirs (ratchet clause).

Background
As noted above, trade agreements typically contain some provisions on
labour standards. Since 2008, the EU has included such provisions in all
their FTAs with third countries. The provisions are typically contained in
the ‘Trade and Sustainable Development’ chapter of an FTA.
A typical EU trade agreement contains the following types of provisions:
•

Commitments to certain multilateral standards (e.g. International
Labour Organisation conventions)

•

Obligations not to waive or fail to enforce domestic labour laws in
order to encourage trade or investment, and

•

Commitments to seek to ensure high levels of labour protection

On the whole, provisions tend to be aspirational or only create soft
(non-enforceable) obligations. For example, most EU FTAs do not
actually prohibit parties from reducing their domestic labour standards.
The enforcement mechanisms for labour provisions in EU FTAs are also
relatively weak. Dispute settlement takes the form of arbitration before
a panel of experts whose decisions are not binding. The parties cannot
normally impose trade sanctions for breaches of labour provisions. 85
The Political Declaration for the future UK-EU agreement, signed in
October 2019, said that the agreement should ensure that both parties
uphold labour standards set out in EU law at the end of the transition. 86

85

86

For a detailed discussion of labour protections under EU and international FTAs, see:
HL European Union Committee, Internal Market Sub-Committee, Uncorrected oral
evidence: The level playing field and state aid, 27 February 2020

Political Declaration setting out the framework for the future relationship between
the European Union and the United Kingdom, October 2019, para 77

39 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

UK position
The UK’s February 2020 negotiating objectives said that a UK-EU
agreement should contain provision on labour standards that were
similar to those in EU trade agreements with other countries, such as
Japan and Canada. It said that this would involve a provision that
prevented parties from reducing their labour standards in order to
encourage trade or investment. 87
The UK published its draft text for a UK-EU free trade agreement (CFTA)
on 19 May 2020. The provisions on trade and labour were extremely
similar to the EU-Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade
Agreement (CETA).
Article 27.4 of the UK draft (upholding levels of protection) was, in fact,
a word-for-word copy of Article 23.4 of CETA. It stated:
1. The Parties recognise that it is inappropriate to encourage trade
or investment by weakening or reducing the levels of protection
afforded in their labour law and standards
2. A Party shall not waive or otherwise derogate from, or offer to
waive or otherwise derogate from, its labour law and standards,
to encourage trade or the establishment, acquisition, expansion or
retention of an investment in its territory.
3. A Party shall not, through a sustained or recurring course of
action or inaction, fail to effectively enforce its labour law and
standards to encourage trade or investment. 88

This provision contained only a soft obligation on reducing domestic
labour standards (“recognise that it is inappropriate”). By contrast, it
would have prohibited the parties from waiving or failing to enforce
their labour standards to encourage trade or investment (“shall not”).
The UK draft also contained a soft obligation (“shall strive to”) to
continue to improve labour standards in the future.
Like CETA, the enforcement provisions in the UK draft included dispute
settlement through a panel of experts whose decisions would not be
binding. Parties would have been unable to impose trade sanctions in
response to breaches of the provisions on labour standards.
Domestic legal context
In domestic law, the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 ensured
that “EU-derived domestic legislation” would continue to have force
even after the European Communities Act 1972 ceased to have effect at
the end of the transition period. This meant most EU-derived workers’
rights would continue to be protected in UK law, although they could
be amended or repealed by future legislation. 89

87

88

89

HM Government, The Future Relationship with the EU: The UK’s Approach to
Negotiations, CP 211, 27 February 2020, para 75
HM Government, Draft working text for a Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement
between the United Kingdom and the European Union, 19 May 2020, Art. 27.4
Commons Library briefing 9099, End of Brexit transition: Workers’ rights, 22
December 2020

40 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

The Government also stressed that in various areas UK employment law
went further than was required by EU law. 90

EU position
The EU’s negotiating directives were published on 25 February 2020.
They said that due to the geographic proximity and economic
interdependence between the UK and the EU, firm commitments were
needed.
The EU mandate said any agreement should prevent the parties from
reducing their labour standards below the level set by EU law at the end
of the transition period. It also said parties should uphold high standards
“over time with [EU] standards as a reference point”. 91
The EU published its draft text for a UK-EU free trade agreement on 18
March 2020. The provisions on labour standards were similar to those in
the November 2018 Withdrawal Agreement (agreed by Theresa May).
Article LPFS 2.27 of the EU draft set out a non-regression clause. It said:
1. A Party shall not adopt or maintain any measure that weakens
or reduces the level of labour and social protection provided by
the Party’s law and practices and by the enforcement thereof,
below the level provided by the common standards applicable
within the Union and the United Kingdom at the end of the
transition period, and by their enforcement. 92

This provision was very similar to Article 4 of Annex 4 to the Protocol on
Ireland/Northern Ireland in the 2018 Withdrawal Agreement. That
provision was understood as preventing the UK from reducing its labour
standards below the level set by EU law at the end of transition. 93
In addition, Article LPFS 2.28 of the EU draft contained a new “ratchet
clause”. It said:
1. Each Party shall seek to increase, through its relevant law and
practices and through the enforcement thereof, the level of
labour and social protection above the level of protection referred
to in Article LPFS.2.27 [Non-regression of the level of protection].
2. Where both Parties have increased, through their relevant law
and practices and through the enforcement thereof, the level of
labour and social protection above the level referred to in Article
LPFS.2.27 [Non-regression of the level of protection], neither Party
shall weaken or reduce its level of labour or social protection
below a level of protection which is at least equivalent to that of
the other Party’s increased level of labour and social protection. 94

The effect of this provision was that if both parties raised their labour
standards after the end of the transition period, it would have created a
90
91

92

93

94

See for example HC Deb 29 October 2019 c203
EU General Affairs Council, Directives for the negotiation of a new partnership with
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, 5870/20, 25 Feb 2020,
paras. 94 and 101
European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, UKTF (2020) 14, 18 March 2020, Art. LPFS 2.27
HM Government, EU Exit: Legal position on the Withdrawal Agreement, Cm 9747,
December 2018, para 54
European Commission, Draft text of the Agreement on the New Partnership with
the United Kingdom, UKTF (2020) 14, 18 March 2020, Art. LPFS 2.28

41 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

new baseline of standards below which regression was prohibited.
However, if only one party raised its standards, there would have been
no hard obligation on the other party to follow.
The EU draft said that the provisions on labour standards would be
subject to the ordinary rules on dispute settlement that applied to the
whole agreement. This meant dispute settlement would take the form
of arbitration and that a party could impose trade sanctions in response
to a breach of the labour standards provisions.
Overall, the EU draft contained significantly stricter obligations than
those normally included in EU FTAs. It contained a hard obligation on
non-regression (“shall not”) and a ratchet clause and these provisions
were subject to stronger dispute settlement procedures.

Negotiations
In December 2020, several media organisations reported that the level
playing field was one of the key remaining areas of disagreement in the
UK-EU negotiations. Reporting suggested that one of the sources of
disagreement was the so-called “ratchet clause” and the question of
whether one party should have to align with the other if it decides to
raise its labour standards. The Irish broadcaster RTE summarised:
The European Commission was still looking for some way to
ensure that there was a level playing field, that it remained level
over time, and that there was a binding mechanism to ensure that
was the case.
Officials say that because the UK was still not engaging in the
idea, the Commission on its own was forced to come up with
suggestions. Combined with the impact of the IMB, and the
whole question of trust, what it came up with appeared to
toughen up the so-called "ratchet" clause, whereby if the EU
raised its standards, the UK should as well.
If they didn’t, and British firms gained an edge over European
ones competing within the same market, there should be the
ability for the EU to retaliate with tariffs, or in another sphere. 95

Neither side made public statements on this issue. However, the dispute
was resolved and a provision on “rebalancing” was included in the TCA.

6.2 The TCA
The provisions on labour standards are contained in Title XI of the TCA
(‘Level Playing Field’). There are three key provisions:
•

Non-regression from levels of protection (Article 387)

•

Multilateral labour standards and agreements (Article 399)

•

Rebalancing (Article 411)

Overall, the obligations on labour standards are stricter than those
normally contained in EU FTAs. Most of the provisions are hard

95

“The level playing field: Brexit for slow learners”, RTE [online], 12 December 2020
(accessed May 2021)

42 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

(enforceable) obligations. Furthermore, the parties can take “temporary
remedies” (trade remedies) if some of these obligations are breached. 96

Non-regression
Article 387 of the TCA sets out a non-regression provision on labour
and social protections:
2. A Party shall not weaken or reduce, in a manner affecting trade
or investment between the Parties, its labour and social levels of
protection below the levels in place at the end of the transition
period, including by failing to effectively enforce its law and
standards. 97

There are several points that should be noted about this provision.
First, like the EU draft, there is a hard obligation (“shall not”) preventing
either party from reducing its labour protections. If one of the parties
reduces its labour protections in breach of this provision, it could lead to
dispute settlement and the imposition of trade remedies (see below).
Second, like the UK draft, the obligation only applies where a reduction
in protection affects trade or investment between the parties. This
means that not every reduction in standards will necessarily be a breach
of this provision.
Third, as was common between the UK and EU drafts, the parties are
prohibited not only from reducing but also from failing to enforce their
laws in a manner that affects trade and investment.
Fourth, the term “labour and social levels of protection” has a specific
definition. It is defined as a party’s laws and standards relating to:
•

Fundamental rights at work

•

Occupational health and safety standards

•

Fair working conditions and employment standards

•

Information and consultation rights at company level, and

•

Restructuring of undertakings

For the UK, this captures all domestic legislation in these areas, even if it
is not derived from EU law. For the EU, it only captures EU legislation. 98
“In a manner affecting trade or investment”
As noted, the non-regression clause only prohibits the parties from
reducing labour protections in a manner that affects trade or investment
between the parties. This is similar to other EU and international FTAs.
However, the use of the term “in a manner affecting” (TCA) rather than
“to encourage” (CETA) suggests intent on its own may not be a breach.
There have been relatively few arbitration decisions on the meaning of
these phrases in the context of provisions on labour standards. The most
96

97

98

See Committee on the Future Relationship with the European Union, Oral evidence:
Progress of the negotiations on the UK’s future relationship with the EU,
HC 203, 6 January 2021, Q1173
Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, UK/EU and EAEC: Trade and
Cooperation Agreement, CP 426, 30 April 2021 (‘TCA’)
Ibid, Article 386

43 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

detailed discussion to date is in the final report of the arbitration panel
in US-Guatemala CAFTA dispute. 99
In the US-Guatemala case, the arbitration panel concluded that to
“affect” meant to have some “material” impact:
We begin by considering the plain meaning of “affecting trade”.
Both disputing Parties acknowledge that to “affect” is to
“influence” or “make a material impression”. We agree. Action
or inaction that is in a manner “affecting trade” must influence or
make a material impression upon some aspect of trade, that is,
upon the cross-border exchange of goods and services.
This means that an interpretation of Article 16.2.1(a) that treated
as a violation every failure, through a sustained or recurring
course of action or inaction, to effectively enforce labor laws
simply because it occurred in a traded sector, or with respect to
an enterprise engaged in trade, would not be consistent with its
wording. It would require no proof of influence or material
impression upon the cross-border exchange of goods and services.
It would simply require proof of some effect on an employer or
economic sector engaged in trade. This is not the same thing as
an effect on trade. Had the CAFTA-DR Parties wished to cover
every failure to enforce through a sustained or recurring course of
action occurring in a traded sector or with respect to enterprise
engaged in trade, they could easily have done so using clearer
language. A failure to effectively enforce labor laws must affect
some aspect of trade. The question is which effects on trade bring
a matter within the scope of Article 16.2.1(a). 100

The panel found that this meant that the measure had to produce some
competitive advantage. However, it rejected an interpretation that
would require evidence of an impact on prices or trade flows (which it
concluded could be impossible to produce). The panel summarised:
Thus our enquiry into whether a failure to enforce labor laws is
such as to confer a competitive advantage in trade between the
CAFTA-DR Parties focused principally on (1) whether the
enterprise or enterprises in question export to CAFTA-DR Parties in
competitive markets or compete with imports from CAFTA-DR
Parties; (2) identifying the effects of a failure to enforce; and (3)
whether these effects are sufficient to confer some competitive
advantage on such an enterprise or such enterprises. 101

It should be noted that the decision of the panel in the US-Guatemala
arbitration does not bind a panel of experts convened under the TCA.
As such, it is possible that a panel of experts may interpret provisions in
the TCA in a different way.
Effective enforcement of labour standards
As can be seen above, Article 387 of the TCA prohibits the parties from
weakening their labour standards by failing to effectively enforce them
in a manner that affects trade or investment.
For a discussion of this case see Phillip Paiement, “Leveraging Trade Agreements for
Labor Law Enforcement: Drawing Lessons from the US-Guatemala CAFTA Dispute”,
Georgetown Journal of International Law, [2017] 49(2), 675
100
In the Matter of Guatemala – Issues Relating to the Obligations Under Article
16.2.1(a) of the CAFTA-DR FINAL REPORT OF THE PANEL June 14, 2017, June 2017,
paras 167-168
101
Ibid, para 192
99

44 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Article 388 clarifies that for this purpose enforcement means having an
effective system of labour inspections. Parties must also have judicial
and administrative routes for individuals to seek redress for breaches of
labour laws, including interim relief.

6.3 Multilateral labour standards
In Article 399, the parties commit to promote and implement the core
labour standards recognised in the International Labour Organisation’s
(ILO) eight Fundamental Conventions. These include:
•

freedom of association and the right to collective bargaining,

•

the elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour,

•

the abolition of child labour, and

•

the elimination of discrimination in employment.

The parties commit to promote the ILO’s Decent Work Agenda. Each
party also commits to implement all the ILO Conventions they have
ratified, as well as the Council of Europe’s European Social Charter.
The importance of this type of provisions was recently evidenced by a
dispute settlement between the EU and the Republic of Korea.
In Article 13.4.3 of the EU-Korea FTA the parties “commit to respecting,
promoting and realising, in their laws” the ILO’s core labour standards.
Before a panel of experts, the EU argued that Korea was in breach of
this provision due to various deficiencies in its trade union legislation
and its failure to implement four of the ILO Fundamental Conventions.
Before the panel, Korea argued that the phrase “commit to” meant the
provision was aspirational. However, the panel found that the phrase
did create binding legal obligation to respect, promote and realise the
ILO conventions. The term “respect” meant not interfering with a right
and the term “promote” meant ensuring third parties did not interfere
with a right. By contrast, the panel decided the term “realise” did not
create a requirement to comply with the ILO Conventions but, rather,
an obligation to realise the principle of the freedom of association. 102
The wording of Article 13.4.3 of the EU-Korea FTA is broadly similar to
Article 399 of the TCA. In fact, under the TCA the parties commit to
“effectively implementing” the core labour standards. However, the
provisions on multilateral standards in the EU-Korea FTA and the TCA
cannot be enforced by trade remedies. Professor Steve Peers explains:
However, one similarity between the UK/EU and UK/S Korea
treaties is crucial: the relevant provisions are both subject to a
relatively limited form of dispute settlement, consisting of
consultation followed by expert panels. No trade remedies can
result, even if the panel finds a breach of the treaty. On the weak
legal effect of a panel report, the EU/UK treaty is even blunter
than the ‘best efforts’ clause in the EU/Korea treaty: ‘the Parties
share the understanding that if the Panel makes
102

European Commission, Panel of Experts proceeding constituted under Article 13.15
of the EU-Korea Free Trae Agreement: Report of the Panel of Experts, 20 January
2021, paras 123-141

45 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

recommendations in its report, the responding Party does not
need to follow these recommendations in ensuring conformity
with the Agreement.’ 103

6.4 Rebalancing
As noted above, one of the key areas of dispute during the negotiation
of the TCA was the question of whether the agreement should contain
a “ratchet clause”. Under the EU draft text, if both parties raised their
labour standards after the end of the transition period, it could set a
new common baseline below which parties could not fall.
Ultimately, the TCA did not include this sort of ratchet clause. However,
Article 411 sets out rules on “rebalancing”. It provides that if future
divergences between UK and EU standards on labour, environment,
climate change or subsidy control cause “material impacts on trade and
investment between the parties”, the parties can take “rebalancing
measures”, which can include trade remedies.
More detailed information on rebalancing measures and the process for
implementing and challenging them are set out below. However, in the
context of labour standards, there are several points to note.
First, the threshold for triggering rebalancing measures is different from
the threshold for triggering the non-regression provisions. A party will
be in breach of the non-regression rules if it reduces its labour standards
in a “manner affecting” trade or investment. By contrast, rebalancing
measures can only be taken if divergence causes “material impacts” on
trade and investment.
Second, for a number of reasons it is not clear exactly how divergence
between the UK and the EU will be assessed.
In the first instance, the EU only has limited competence in the field of
labour and social standards, meaning many issues are left to individual
Member States. 104 This would suggest that divergence can only arise in
areas where the EU has the competence to act.
In addition, it is not clear whether divergence can only arise from future
acts of the parties or whether existing divergences can trigger the
obligation, such as in areas where the UK has gone further than EU law.
More broadly, as with the non-regression provisions, it may be difficult
to show that a particular divergence has impacted trade or investment.
Professor Catherine Barnard noted this issue in oral evidence to the
Committee on the Future Relationship with the European Union:
Going forward, which is where the rebalancing kicks in, when
might the rebalancing mechanism apply to future developments
in labour law? The question is what happens if the EU, as it might
do, starts legislating a bit more enthusiastically in the field of
labour law, because it has this European pillar on social rights and
Steve Peers, Free trade v freedom of association? The EU/South Korea free trade
agreement and the panel report on the EU challenge to South Korean labour law,
EU Law Analysis, 26 January 2021
104
Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union [2012]
OJ C326, Art. 153
103

46 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

it is going to use it; it has shown signs of using it. The most
interesting provision coming out under that is on minimum wage.
It is not actually setting a minimum wage, but requiring states to
think about minimum wages.
Will that suggest that there is a disequilibrium, because the EU
has this and the UK does not? On the other hand, we would say,
“Look, we already have minimum wage legislation, which is
regularly reviewed over time”. It is not clear to me quite how
these provisions will be triggered, if you think about concrete
examples, because, as I have said, in respect of the nonregression, it is quite hard to argue that some smaller changes,
significant for employees, will in and of themselves be enough to
trigger the threshold of affecting trade or investment, even
without the criterion of materiality. 105

Ultimately, these issues will need to be addressed on a case-by-case
basis with the potential of resorting to dispute settlement.

6.5 Dispute settlement
The level playing field provisions, including those on labour and social
standards, are subject to their own separate dispute settlement process.
This involves consultation between the parties and, ultimately, the
establishment of a panel of experts. As in other EU FTAs, these are
relatively weak provisions as the recommendations of the panel are not
binding. 106
However, there is one significant difference between the TCA and other
EU FTAs. Specifically, Article 410 of the TCA provides that if a panel of
experts finds that a party has breached a non-regression provision, and
the respondent party has not taken steps to comply with the panel’s
report, the complaining party can take “temporary remedies”. As a
result, the provisions on non-regression from labour standards has a far
stronger enforcement mechanism than in typical FTAs.
The provisions on dispute settlement are discussed in more detail in
section 8 below.

Committee on the Future Relationship with the European Union, Oral evidence:
Progress of the negotiations on the UK’s future relationship with the EU, HC 203,
6 January 2021, Q1169
106
TCA, Article 409(9)
105

47 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

7. Environment and climate
7.1 Overview
On environment and climate change, the TCA provides for both existing
environmental standards and climate change measures to be
maintained by both sides, together with more specific requirements for
different sectors. A central theme of the TCA is the principle of nonregression, which commits both sides to not lowering environmental
standards.
Both sides compromised somewhat during the negotiations. Whilst both
the EU and UK are now free to introduce and enforce their own
environmental and climate laws, they must do so in a way that doesn’t
gain an advantage in trade or investment. If either party feels a
competitive advantage has been gained, they have the option to take
rebalancing measures to address this.
Both Parties have agreed to continue respecting existing international
environmental commitments, including the requirements of the Paris
Climate Change Agreement, and to the sharing of information on the
ratification, implementation and negotiation of existing or new
multilateral environmental agreements.

7.2 The TCA: Definitions and terms
Environmental levels of protection
Chapter 7 of the TCA covers environment and climate. Article 390 sets
out the definition of ‘environmental levels of protection’ as:
…the levels of protection provided overall in a Party's law which
have the purpose of protecting the environment, including the
prevention of a danger to human life or health from
environmental impacts, including in each of the following areas:
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
f)
g)

h)

industrial emissions;
air emissions and air quality;
nature and biodiversity conservation;
waste management;
the protection and preservation of the aquatic environment;
the protection and preservation of the marine environment;
the prevention, reduction and elimination of risks to human
health or the environment arising from the production, use,
release or disposal of chemical substances; or
the management of impacts on the environment from agricultural
or food production, notably through the use of antibiotics and
decontaminants.

Climate level of protection
Climate level of protection is defined within the TCA as:
…the level of protection with respect to emissions and removals
of greenhouse gases and the phase-out of ozone depleting
substances. With regard to greenhouse gases, this means:
a)

for the Union, the 40 % economy-wide 2030 target, including the
Union's system of carbon pricing;

48 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

b)

for the United Kingdom, the United Kingdom's economy-wide
share of this 2030 target, including the United Kingdom's system
of carbon pricing.

Environmental and climate principles
Article 393 sets out the Environmental and climate principles of the
Trade and Cooperation Agreement. This states that:
… each Party commits to respecting the internationally recognised
environmental principles to which it has committed, such as in the
Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, adopted at Rio
de Janeiro on 14 June 1992 (the "1992 Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development") and in multilateral
environmental agreements, including in the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change, done at New York on
9 May 1992 ("UNFCCC") and the Convention on Biological
Diversity, done at Rio de Janeiro on 5 June 1992 (the "Convention
on Biological Diversity"), in particular:
a)

the principle that environmental protection should
be integrated into the making of policies,

b)

including through impact assessments;

c)

the principle of preventative action to avert
environmental damage;

d)

the precautionary approach referred to in Article
356 (2);

e)

the principle that environmental damage should as a
priority be rectified at source; and

f)

the polluter pays principle.

Box 4: UK Draft Environmental Policy Statement and consultation
On 10 March the government published a Draft Environmental Policy Statement and launched a
consultation seeking views on it which closes on 2 June 2021.
The environmental principles set out in the draft policy statement “operate as a set of overarching
principles in the development of all relevant policy with an impact on the environment”. 107 They closely
match those set out in the TCA and their meanings are explained in the draft policy statement as
follows:
•
The integration principle is the principle that policy-makers should look for opportunities to
embed environmental protection in other fields of policy that have impacts on the environment.
It is an overarching objective which is relevant in all circumstances where the legal duty to have
due regard to the policy statement applies.
•
The prevention principle means that government policy should aim to prevent, reduce or
mitigate environmental harm.
•
The rectification at source principle means that if damage to the environment cannot be
prevented it should be tackled at its origin.
•
The polluter pays principle is the principle that those who cause pollution or damage to the
environment should be responsible for mitigation or compensation.
•
The precautionary principle states that where there are threats of serious or irreversible
environmental damage, a lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for
postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation 108
The policy statement is a statutory document and the Environment Bill requires that “a Minister of the
Crown to have ‘due regard’ to this policy statement when making policy”. 109

Defra, Draft Environmental Principles Policy Statement, 10 March 2021
Ibid
109
Ibid
107
108

49 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

7.3 Trade and sustainable development
Article 397 of the TCA sets out the foundations and broad objectives for
trade and sustainable development. This is based primarily on the
principles of and commitments to international agreements such as the
Rio Declaration and the Sustainable Development Goals. Article 397
states that:
The Parties recall the Agenda 21 and the 1992 Rio Declaration on
Environment and Development, the Johannesburg Plan of
Implementation of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development of 2002, the International Labour Organization (ILO)
Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization, adopted at
Geneva on 10 June 2008 by the International Labour Conference
at its 97th Session (the "2008 ILO Declaration on Social Justice for
a Fair Globalization"), the Outcome Document of the UN
Conference on Sustainable Development of 2012 entitled "The
Future We Want", endorsed by the UN General Assembly
Resolution 66/288 adopted on 27 July 2012, and the UN 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by the UN General
Assembly Resolution 70/1 on 25 September 2015 and its
Sustainable Development Goals.
In light of paragraph 1 of this Article, the objective of this Chapter
is to enhance the integration of sustainable development, notably
its labour and environmental dimensions, in the Parties' trade and
investment relationship and in this respect to complement the
commitments of the Parties under Chapters 6 and 7. 110

Article 400 sets out the commitment of both Parties to implementing
multilateral environmental agreements:
The Parties recognise the importance of the UN Environment
Assembly of the UN Environment Programme and of multilateral
environmental governance and agreements as a response of the
international community to global or regional environmental
challenges and stress the need to enhance the mutual
supportiveness between trade and environment policies, rules and
measures. 111

To facilitate this commitment, the TCA requires both Parties to regularly
exchange information on aspects of the ratification, implementation
and negotiation of existing or new multilateral environmental
agreements.
Subsequent articles in the TCA (401 to 406) set out the commitment of
both Parties to international agreements in relation to specific areas of
trade and sustainability. These are arranged under the following
headings:
•

Article 401 - Trade and climate change

•

Article 402 - Trade and biological diversity

•

Article 403 - Trade and forests

•

Article 404 - Trade and sustainable management of marine
biological resources and aquaculture

110
111

TCA, Art. 397
TCA, Art. 400

50 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

•

Article 405 – Trade and investment favouring sustainable
development

•

Article 406 - Trade and responsible supply chain management

7.4 Non-regression from levels of protection
During the negotiations the EU wanted the UK to ensure its laws
matched EU environmental legislation. It pushed for “dynamic
alignment” with a “ratchet clause” whereby if one party raised its
environmental standards the other party could not then drop below this
new minimum level. The UK however argued that as it was no longer
part of the EU and unable to influence EU regulations it should have
freedom to legislate independently.
The final TCA allows each party “to determine the environmental levels
of protection and climate level of protection it deems appropriate and
to adopt or modify its law and policies in a manner consistent with each
Party's international commitments”. 112 However, the TCA also aims to
prevent either party weakening environmental legislation below the
levels in place at the end of the transition period. Article 391 of the TCA
states that:
A Party shall not weaken or reduce, in a manner affecting trade or
investment between the Parties, its environmental levels of
protection or its climate level of protection below the levels that
are in place at the end of the transition period, including by failing
to effectively enforce its environmental law or climate level of
protection. 113

The TCA also states that the individual parties are able to make
discretionary choices over the allocation of resources for ensuring levels
of environmental protection are maintained.
The Parties recognise that each Party retains the right to exercise
reasonable discretion and to make bona fide decisions regarding
the allocation of environmental enforcement resources with
respect to other environmental law and climate policies
determined to have higher priorities, provided that the exercise of
that discretion, and those decisions, are not inconsistent with its
obligations under this Chapter. 114

In addition to the principle of non-regression, Article 391 of the TCA
also encourages both parties to increase levels of environmental and
climate protection. This states that:
The Parties shall continue to strive to increase their respective
environmental levels of protection or their respective climate level
of protection referred to in this Chapter. 115

7.5 Enforcement
The TCA sets out how each party should enforce its relevant
environmental and climate legislation. Article 394 states that:

TCA, Art. 391 (1)
TCA, Art. 391 (2)
114
TCA, Art. 391 (3)
115
TCA, Art. 391 (5)
112
113

51 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

For the purposes of enforcement as referred to in Article 391,
each Party shall, in accordance with its law, ensure that:
a)

b)

domestic authorities competent to enforce the relevant law with
regard to environment and climate give due consideration to
alleged violations of such law that come to their attention; those
authorities shall have adequate and effective remedies available to
them, including injunctive relief as well as proportionate and
dissuasive sanctions, if appropriate; and
national administrative or judicial proceedings are available to
natural and legal persons with a sufficient interest to bring actions
against violations of such law and to seek effective remedies,
including injunctive relief, and that the proceedings are not
prohibitively costly and are conducted in a fair, equitable and
transparent way. 116

The establishment of the Office for Environmental Protection (OEP)
under the Environment Bill will fill the enforcement gap left by the UK’s
departure from the EU. The OEP will “provide scrutiny and advice on the
implementation of environment law and will receive and investigate
complaints on alleged breaches of environment law by public
authorities, with the ability to take legal action in serious cases”. 117
However, delays to the Environment Bill’s passage through Parliament
have prevented the OEP from being fully established.
The OEP will have a statutory role in England and in Northern Ireland,
subject to the approval of the Northern Ireland Assembly. In Scotland,
Environmental Standards Scotland will fulfil this role and the Welsh
Government plans to install an independent commissioner to carry out a
similar role.
Further information on the Environment Bill and the establishment of
the OEP is in the Commons Library briefing 9119 covering the
Committee and Remaining stages in the Commons.
The TCA requires that the enforcement bodies of the UK must regularly
meet with the European Commission to cooperate on monitoring and
enforcement of Environmental and Climate law. However, the
frequency with which these meetings must occur is not specifically
mentioned in the agreement.
The Parties shall ensure that the European Commission and the
supervisory bodies of the United Kingdom regularly meet with
each other and co-operate on the effective monitoring and
enforcement of the law with regard to environment and climate
as referred to in Article 391. 118

7.6 Rebalancing
Rebalancing measures set out in Article 411 of the TCA are designed to
prevent either side gaining an advantage in trade or investment if the
other party introduces higher standards of environmental or climate
protections. While recognising the right of each party to determine its
future priorities with respect to environmental or climate protection,
TCA, Art. 394
HL European Union Committee, Beyond Brexit: food, environment, energy and
health, HL 247, 23 March 2021
118
TCA, Art. 395
116
117

52 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Article 411 provides that if future divergences between UK and EU
standards causes “material impacts on trade and investment between
the parties”, the parties can take “rebalancing measures”, which can
include trade remedies. For further detail see section 8.5 below.

7.7 Issues and commentary
EU Environment Sub-Committee Inquiry
On 23 March 2021, the House of Lords EU Environment Sub-Committee
(part of the European Union Committee) published Beyond Brexit: food,
environment, energy and health. This report followed an inquiry into the
provisions in the TCA and looked at any challenges that could arise,
how to resolve them an where UK-EU relations should progress from
here. As part of the inquiry, the EU Environment Sub-Committee took
evidence from a range of organisations in the fields of agriculture and
food, fishing, environment and climate change, energy, chemicals, and
health. Some of the key information from the inquiry and analysis from
additional sources is set out below.
Enforcement
In written evidence to the EU Committee, Greener UK, a coalition of 12
major environmental organisations, questioned the enforceability of the
environmental provisions in the TCA stating that:
…the majority of the environmental provisions are not
enforceable and while sanctions are available in relation to
disputes about non-regression, the value of this is limited by the
narrow focus on trade and investment impact. 119

Greener UK went on to criticise the dispute mechanisms for dealing
with environmental disputes stating that neither the environment nor
trade and sustainable development were covered by the full dispute
mechanism. Dispute settlement is covered in more detail in section 8
below however the comments from Greener UK stated that:
For environment-related provisions to have a real impact, they
must be supported by well-designed and effective governance
mechanisms that enable meaningful enforcement where
appropriate. However, the full horizontal dispute settlement
mechanism applying to the core of the TCA does not apply to the
environment or trade and sustainable development chapters.
Instead, the agreement provides for a weaker mechanism
involving consultations between the parties and the convening of
a panel of experts. 120

The House of Lords European Union Committee expressed similar
concerns over the enforceability of some of the provisions in the TCA
stating that:
We are glad that the Government and the EU were able to find
compromises on the environment and climate change Chapter of
the TCA, though we share the concerns voiced by witnesses
about the enforceability of some provisions. 121
Written evidence from Greener UK (EEH0030)
Written evidence from Greener UK (EEH0030)
121
HL European Union Committee, Beyond Brexit: food, environment, energy and
health, HL 247, 23 March 2021
119
120

53 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

Non-regression
In giving evidence to the European Union Committee, Greener UK
outlined its disappointment at the inclusion of a trade and investment
test when assessing any weakening of environmental and climate
standards. However, the group also welcomed the fact that it provided
a stronger enforcement mechanism than other areas of the TCA.
The inclusion of a trade and investment test is disappointing –
providing proof of damaging economic impacts on the other party
will be difficult and potentially a protracted undertaking. It is
therefore not clear to what extent this provision will act as an
effective safeguard against lower standards in the future. A nonregression mechanism that was broader in scope and applied
irrespective of possible impacts on trade or investment should
have been included in the TCA. However, it is welcome that the
provision has a better enforcement mechanism attached,
compared to the rest of the environment and sustainable
development chapters. Either party can take action via temporary
remedies if the other party does not conform to the assessment of
a panel of experts in relation to a dispute. 122

Brexit and the environment, a website funded by the Economic and
Social Research Councill, provides analysis and commentary on how
Brexit affects the environment. A recent article highlighted limitations in
the non-regression elements of the TCA:
Whilst the TCA concluded between the UK and EU does include
non-regression and environmental progression, it does so in a
limited way. For example, the commitment to non-regression is a
limited environmental policy with direct trade and investment
implications.
The 2019 Political Declaration that the EU and the UK signed
committed both sides to establish ‘appropriate mechanisms’’ to
ensure environmental policy is adequately implemented and
enforced. However, the UK Government was eventually forced to
concede that the OEP – will not be fully up and running until at
least the second half of 2021. In January 2021, the environment
ministry (DEFRA) announced that because of COVID-19, the Bill
would not receive Royal Assent until the Autumn. Even if it is
adopted by 1 January 2022 (by then it would be a year late),
environmental groups remain fearful that it will not be sufficiently
independent to hold the Government fully to account. 123

Devolved Policy
The environment is a devolved policy competence and as such concern
has been raised by some analysts from Brexit & Environment over
whether there will be a UK-wide level playing field and whether
different UK nations will want to or be able to have different
environmental standards to each other:
…the Environment Bill is mainly England facing, leaving Scotland,
Wales and Northern Ireland scope to develop their own bespoke
systems. The Scottish Government has expressed its determination
to dynamically align with EU rules. However, the highly
contentious Internal Market Bill, which seeks to create a new UK122
123

Written evidence from Greener UK (EEH0030)
Brexit & Environment, Environmental Regulation in the Post-Brexit Era, 23 March
2021

54 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

wide level playing field, may limit the freedom of action of the
devolved nations. They have voiced their fear that the rules of the
largest market, England, will drive standards across the whole of
the UK. 124

The same concern was also raised by Colin T. Reid, professor of Law at
the University of Dundee who gave evidence to the European Union
Committee and stated that it represented a major challenge:
There is a major challenge created by the UK Government
agreeing such a far-reaching Agreement when responsibility for
many of the matters covered lies in the hands of the devolved
administrations. 125

On 31 December 2020 the Scottish Government published an early
assessment of what the outcome of the EU-UK negotiations means for
Scotland. Commenting on the impact of UK’s deal on Scotland, the
Scottish Government stated its intention to remain aligned with EU rules
where possible but highlighted the potential threat to environmental
protections posed by the Internal Market Act 2020.
Scotland is committed to maintaining high environmental
standards through the UK Withdrawal from the European Union
(Continuity) (Scotland) Bill, and intends to stay aligned with EU
rules where possible and practicable to do so. However,
protections risk being impaired by both the loss of participation in
EU frameworks, systems and collaborative programmes, and by
the threat to devolved competency in these areas posed by the
United Kingdom Internal Market Act 2020. 126

The Welsh Government has also expressed concerns about the
complexity of certain aspects of the TCA. On 12 February 2021
(updated 11 March 2021) it published ‘The new relationship with the
EU: What it means for Wales’ which examined the implications of the
TCA for citizens, business, and communities in Wales. The section of the
report covering ‘Labour and Environmental Rights’ questioned how the
non-regression principle of the TCA would work and be enforced in
practise, stating that:
The intention is to eliminate any possible competitive advantage
by either party through a reduction in the costs of production as a
result of such changes. As a concept, it has precedents in other
trade agreements. However, the nature of the high and complex
regulatory standards of the EU Single Market, combined with the
very large volume of existing EU-UK trade in goods, including
integrated crossborder supply chains, makes this a particularly
difficult issue to address. It is not immediately clear how this will
operate in practice or how it will be enforced. The TCA provides
for further work between the EU and the UK to oversee this issue.
In any event, the legal nature and enforcement of these issues is
now of a more complex nature. The precise nature of legal
obligations in either jurisdiction may diverge over time. This could
cause a lack of clarity and ultimately discrepancies, in interpreting
issues such as social and environmental rights.

Brexit & Environment, Environmental Regulation in the Post-Brexit Era, 23 March
2021
125
Written evidence from Prof Colin Reid (EEH0004)
126
Gov.scot, EU-UK negotiations: outcome analysis, 31 December 2020
124

55 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

In any event, the whole TCA has an inherent vulnerability because
of this. It provides for so-called “rebalancing”, when either party
believes that regulatory changes have led to divergence in a
manner that gives one party a competitive advantage in trade or
investment. This could lead to either party taking remedial action
to address such imbalances, pending their review by an
independent arbitration panel; and could ultimately lead to the
termination of the trade provisions in the TCA. 127

The House of Lords European Union Committee has also recognised the
potential policy implications of the TCA for the devolved nations and
has urged the government to fully address them as soon as possible:
The TCA negotiated by the Government will affect the policy
choices available to devolved administrations and legislatures in
areas of devolved competence including the environment. There
are already diverging environment and climate change goals
across the UK, which could indicate challenges ahead. We urge
the Government to address any concerns raised by the devolved
administrations regarding the TCA’s environment and climate
change provisions - via the Common Frameworks programme or
other routes - as fully and promptly as possible. 128

Rebalancing
The rebalancing measures in the TCA were welcomed by a number of
witnesses giving evidence to the House of Lords European Union
Committee. However, several witnesses questioned how the
rebalancing measures would be implemented in practise. Greener UK
commented that:
This process [rebalancing] should be a useful tool given much
greater environmental ambition will be needed in the coming
years, although the effectiveness of this novel mechanism remains
to be seen.
It is not yet clear how provisions such as rebalancing will work in
practice … Early cases will be important in determining how terms
are interpreted—for example, it will be for the arbitration tribunal
to decide what is a material impact, significant divergence and
reliable evidence. 129

The European Union Committee welcomed the inclusion of rebalancing
measures in the TCA citing the UK’s leading role in climate change
policies as an example of where a competitive advantage might be
gained by the EU:
We welcome the fact that the rebalancing measures help mitigate
the threat of competitive disadvantage that could otherwise have
limited the Parties’ ambitions on environment and climate change
protections. There are policies—especially in relation to climate
change—where the UK’s progress exceeds the EU’s. 130

Gov.wales, The new relationship with the EU: What it means for Wales, 12 February
2021
128
HL European Union Committee, Beyond Brexit: food, environment, energy and
health, HL 247, 23 March 2021 p37
129
Written evidence from Greener UK (EEH0030)
130
HL European Union Committee, Beyond Brexit: food, environment, energy and
health, 23 March 2021, p37
127

56 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Environmental Principles
The Environmental Principles set out by the government to replace those
set out in EU treaties and law have received some criticism from the
independent think tank Green Alliance. Writing for the think tank,
Professor Maria Lee highlighted that UK faces “a necessarily complex
legal situation, with a maze of retained provisions and inherited case
law within which the principles will need to operate”. She also
“emphasised that this new legislation does not enforce the principles
systemically or in the same legally binding way as the previous EU
framework. They will apply only at a high level and ministers only need
to pay them ‘due regard’.” 131 Further analysis from contributors to the
Green Alliance blog were also set out:
Professor Eloise Scotford of UCL described in greater detail the
draft policy statement emphasising the scale of the challenge that
Defra faces, given the multi-faceted nature of the principles and
the multiple functions they serve. She said there was an
unanswered need for the principles to influence thinking right
from the earliest inception of a policy, not just to be bolted onto
the end of the process.
David Wolfe QC offered the benefit of his experience within the
courts, in interpreting and applying the public sector equality
duty. He noted that the Environment Bill set up the principles as
process obligations for policy making in a similar way, but both
the legislation and the policy statement lack the same clarity and
strength of the equality duty. 132

7.8 Climate change
The TCA sets out a range of principles covering the level playing field
and environment, including climate change, as set out above. There are
also some provisions and language that are specific to climate change,
both in the area of non-regression and future collaboration.
The European Commission’s Q&A document on the TCA called the
provisions included on climate change “an ambitions framework for
cooperation”:
The Agreement also establishes an ambitious framework for
cooperation in the fight against climate change, as well as
provisions for cooperation in the development of offshore energy,
with a clear focus on the North Sea. 133

The Summary document published by the UK Government in December
2020, does not refer to the framework but does highlight the high
standards on climate change (and environment) embedded in the TCA:
The Government has embedded into this Agreement our
manifesto commitment to high labour environment and climate
standards without giving the EU any say over our rules. 134

Green Alliance, The government is on the brink of making a mistake over
environmental principles, 30 April 2021
132
Green Alliance, The government is on the brink of making a mistake over
environmental principles, 30 April 2021
133
European Commission, Q&A: EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement, 24
December 2020
134
Gov.uk, UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement Summary, 24 December 2020
131

57 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

The TCA refers to climate change as “an existential threat to humanity”.
Article 764 (the fight against climate change), under the heading setting
out the basis for cooperation between the parties. It also commits both
Parties to uphold the Paris Agreement and do nothing to “materially
defeat the object and purpose” of the Paris Agreement.
Specific provisions related to climate change include Article 392 on
carbon pricing which requires both parties to have an effective carbon
pricing scheme in place, covering certain sectors. It also requires existing
levels of coverage to be maintained, as set out in Article 391 on nonregression.
Article 401 on trade and climate change (under the trade and
sustainable development heading) states support for the Paris
Agreement, including reference to the ambition to keep global
temperature increases below 1.5oC, and sets a basis for trade that
supports a green transition:
(a) commits to effectively implementing the UNFCCC, and the
Paris Agreement of which one principal aim is strengthening the
global response to climate change and holding the increase in the
global average temperature to well below 2 ºC above preindustrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature
increase to 1,5 ºC above pre-industrial levels;
(b) shall promote the mutual supportiveness of trade and climate
policies and measures thereby contributing to the transition to a
low greenhouse gas emission, resource-efficient economy and to
climate-resilient development; and
(c) shall facilitate the removal of obstacles to trade and investment
in goods and services of particular relevance for climate change
mitigation and adaptation, such as renewable energy, energy
efficient products and services, for instance through addressing
tariff and non-tariff barriers or through the adoption of policy
frameworks conducive to the deployment of the best available
solutions. 135

Climate change is also listed in Article 770 on global cooperation on
issues of shared economic, environmental and social interest which
states that “parties shall endeavour to cooperate on current and
emerging global issues of common interest”.
The TCA also refers in several places to areas to support the reduction in
greenhouse gas emissions. Article 319 and 320 specifically provide for
the promotion and support of renewable energy. Article 367 (14) refers
to subsidies that are allowed subject to conditions, if aimed at
“delivering a secure, affordable and sustainable energy system and a
well-functioning and competitive energy market or increasing the level
of environmental protection”.

Commentary
An article by UK in a Changing Europe, The EU-UK Agreement is the
first to make climate change a make or break issue, published 25
January 2021 considers the language on climate change in the TCA is
“one of the strongest in any trade agreement”:
135

TCA, Art. 401 (2)

58 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Among the most important provisions is Article [764], which
declares the fight against climate change as a one of the bases for
cooperation, alongside democracy, the rule of law, human rights
and the non-proliferation of WMDs.
Further, Article [771] affirms that Article [764(1)] is an ‘essential
element’ of the partnership established by the TCA as well as ‘any
supplementing agreement.’
Essential elements are important when determining suspension or
termination of a treaty in international law under the law of
treaties.
This language is one of the strongest found in any trade
agreement, declaring that ‘climate change represents an
existential threat to humanity’. 136

The article also highlights the requirement for both parties to have
effective carbon pricing in place:
Article [392] obliges both parties to ‘have in place an effective
system of carbon pricing’ and suggests that they give serious
thought on linking their respective carbon pricing systems to
preserve the system’s integrity and possibly increase its
effectiveness and avoids major differences with Northern Ireland
which will still apply the emissions trading scheme for some
sectors under the Withdrawal Agreement. 137

Analysis by Chris Papanicolaou of law firm JonesDay of the climate
change provisions in the TCA, focused on implications for business,
concluded that a movement away from net zero commitments by both
Parties was unlikely given the provisions included in the TCA:
The TCA includes tools and mechanisms for the enforcement of
the level playing field commitments, including the ability of either
party to impose duties unilaterally, subject to review by an
arbitration panel, where a change creates a significant negative
effect on trade or investment between the EU and the UK. If such
measures are used too frequently, either side can trigger a review
of these provisions and the trade aspects of the TCA more
broadly, aiming to end with a different balance of rights and
obligations.
As an international treaty, the TCA does not give businesses the
direct right to challenge a party's noncompliance. Equally,
divergence from the commitments only becomes an issue where
the impact distorts trade and investment between the parties. In
the short term, it is difficult to assess the immediate impact on
businesses in the context of environmental and climate change
regulation, but a move by either the EU or UK away from rules
designed to achieve climate neutrality by 2050 is unlikely, given
the express provisions of the TCA designed to prevent this. 138

The Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit (ECIU), in its analysis of the
TCA supported this view and predicted the commitments to net-zero in
the Agreement set a precedent for their inclusion in future trade deals:

UK in a Changing Europe, The EU-UK Agreement is the first to make climate change
a make or break issue, 25 January 2021
137
Ibid
138
Chris Papanicolaou, Climate Change Provisions of the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation
Agreement, 3 March 2021
136

59 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

For the first time in a trade agreement, and perhaps setting a
precedent for future deals for example with the US and China, the
net zero carbon emissions by 2050 target is embedded within the
text.
Specifically, the phrase ‘each party reaffirms its ambition of
achieving economy-wide climate neutrality by 2050’ has many
climate experts singing the praises of the deal, as a regression –
going back on the net zero goal – could now result in the TCA
being terminated, suspended or presumably causing tariffs to be
imposed between the two trading blocs. It therefore appears that
climate change and net zero is now a make-or-break issue for the
success of the deal. 139

Greener UK concluded about the agreement overall that it has “the
potential to be dynamic and adjust over time to reflect new cooperative
arrangements between the UK and EU”. On climate change specifically
it welcomed the provisions but expressed concern about the threshold
for proof of any breach:
The fight against climate change is explicitly specified in Article
[771] as constituting an ‘essential element’ of the agreement.
Furthermore, 'materially defeating the object and purpose of the
Paris Agreement’ is explicitly specified in Article [772] as
constituting a serious and substantial failure to fulfil an essential
element of this agreement. This is a very welcome provision, and
means any serious breach can lead to the suspension or
termination of all or parts of the agreement. However, we note
that the threshold of demonstrating that a party has defeated the
object and purpose of the agreement may be a high threshold to
meet. 140

The ECIU also highlighted that the TCA did not set out what would
constitute a breach of the agreement on climate grounds:
Actions that would constitute a breach of the deal in terms of
climate change are not explicit in the TCA’s text. Although Marley
Morris, an expert that recently published a report on the Brexit
deal, explains that to be directly in breach of the TCA, there
would have to be a renouncement of the Paris Agreement from
one side, or clarity that one party is not delivering. 141

For further detailed analysis, Carbon Brief produced a detailed Q&A on
the negotiations and the TCA in January 2021, which is available on
their website.

ECIU, Brexit: implications for energy and climate change (accessed May 2021)
Greener UK, Initial environmental analysis of the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation
Agreement, 29 December 2020
141
ECIU, Brexit: implications for energy and climate change (accessed May 2021)
139
140

60 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

8. Dispute settlement
8.1 The general governance and dispute
settlement mechanisms
Governance provisions for the TCA and supplementing agreements are
set out in Title III of Part One of the Agreement. This includes a UK-EU
Partnership Council to supervise the operation of the Agreement at a
political level, providing strategic direction chaired by a UK Government
Minister and European Commissioner. 142 Decisions will be taken by
mutual consent and will be binding on the two parties. Either party can
refer any issue relating to the implementation or interpretation of the
TCA and supplementing agreements to the Partnership Council. It will
have the power to adopt decisions and recommendations in relation to
the application of the Agreement. The Partnership Council is supported
by a set of committees. These include a Trade Partnership Committee
covering the trade aspects of the TCA. This in turn is supported by
several Specialised Committees including the Specialised Committee on
Level Playing Field for Open and Fair Competition.
Title I, Part Six of the TCA set out mechanisms for “avoiding and settling
disputes” between the parties in relation to interpretation and
application of the TCA and supplementing agreements. This involves
recourse to an independent arbitration tribunal if consultations
between the two parties fail to reach a solution. These provisions are
similar to those found in other international agreements, including the
WTO agreement. The arbitration tribunal consists of a UK nominee, an
EU nominee and a jointly agreed chair, drawn from a list of potential
arbitrators established by the Partnership Council. All arbitrators need to
be independent of the EU and Member States’ and UK Governments.
Where one party feels that the other party is in breach of the TCA it can
request consultations. These can take place in the Partnership Council
or Specialised Committee. If the matter is not resolved within 30 days,
the two parties can extend the consultation period or refer it to an
arbitration tribunal. The tribunal has up to 160 days to make a ruling.
Various timelines are set out in Part Six, although these are halved
where the tribunal agrees that the matter is urgent.
Certain parts of the TCA are exempted from these provisions but they
apply to most of Part Two (trade, transport, fisheries and other
arrangements).
In cases of non-compliance with an arbitration tribunal hearing, certain
treaty obligations can be suspended. This includes the possibility of
cross-retaliation in certain parts of Part Two of the TCA, so that treaty
obligations could be suspended in one area for a breach of obligations
in another part of Part Two. Any such suspension must be proportionate
and appropriate and can be challenged before an arbitration tribunal.
142

The UK has appointed Lord Frost, Minister of State in the Cabinet Office, as its cochair in the Partnership Council. The EU co-chair is Vice-President of the European
Commission Maroš Šefčovič.

61 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

The suspension should be withdrawn if the responding party then
complies with the initial ruling. The tribunal can be asked to rule on
whether compliance has been achieved.
Unlike the Withdrawal Agreement there is no role for the Court of
Justice of the EU (CJEU) in the dispute settlement provisions. The CJEU
provides binding interpretations of questions EU law to arbitration
panels in the WA dispute settlement process, where a matter raises such
questions. The EU sought a similar role for the CJEU in the TCA, but this
was opposed by the UK. Provisions of the TCA will be interpreted in line
with public international law including the Vienna Convention on the
Law on Treaties 1969.

8.2 Exceptions and Bespoke Provisions for
the Level playing field
Article 735 (2) sets out exceptions to the Part Six dispute settlement
provisions. These include the following provisions in the level playing
field title (Title XI of Heading One of Part Two):
•

Article 355(1), (2) and (4), setting out general principles and
objectives in the general provisions of the level playing field title (see
section 1.2)

•

Article 356(1) and (3) covering right to regulate, precautionary
approach and scientific and technical information in the general
provisions (see section 7.2 above)

•

Chapter 2 (Competition Policy) (see section 2.2 above)

•

Article 371 (which provides that both parties establish an
operationally independent authority with an appropriate role in its
subsidy control regime) and Article 372 (which provides for domestic
courts to hear claims, review decisions and grant remedies in
Chapter 3 (subsidy control) (see sections 3.4 and 3.5 above)

•

Chapter 5 (Taxation) (see section 5.2 above), and

•

Article 411(4) to (9) in Chapter 9 (horizontal and institutional
provisions) which enables either party to request a review of the
trade heading (Heading One of Part Two) and for the parties to add
other headings to the review. This is described further in section 8.6.

8.3 Panel of Experts for Labour, environment
and climate, sustainable development
Chapter 6 (labour and social standards), chapter 7 (environment and
climate) and chapter 8 (other instruments for trade and sustainable
development) of Title XI have derogations from the Part Six dispute
settlement provisions although these are not specified under Article 735
(2).
For each of these chapters, provisions for consultation (Article 408) and
for a panel of experts rather than an arbitration tribunal (Article 409) are
set out under chapter 9 (horizontal and institutional provisions) of Title
XI.

62 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Article 408 provides that a party may request consultations with the
other regarding any matter arising under Article 355 (3) in chapter 1
(the mutual commitment to climate neutrality by 2050) and chapters 6,
7 and 8. Consultations have to begin within 30 days of the request with
the aim of reaching a mutually satisfactory resolution of the matter.
Article 409 provides that where consultations do not reach a satisfactory
resolution, a party may request that a panel of experts be convened to
examine that matter. This can be done 90 days after the original request
for consultations. This is longer than the minimum 30 day consultation
period in the Part Six dispute settlement mechanism.
The panel of experts will be established and operate in a similar way to
the arbitration tribunal outlined in the Part Six mechanism. It will be
composed of three panellists. These will be selected from a list of at
least 15 individuals established by The Trade Specialised Committee on
the Level Playing Field at its first meeting after the entry into force of the
TCA. 143 The list will consist of at least five nominations from each party
and five individuals able to serve as chair. The list of potential chairs will
not include nationals of either party. The experts will have specialised
knowledge of the fields covered by these chapters, or in international
dispute resolution, and meet similar criteria for independence from
either party as the arbitration tribunal members.
The panel can seek information from other international bodies and
experts where relevant (for example from the International Labour
Organization or other relevant bodies). It will issue an interim report
setting out findings within 100 days of its establishment. This can be
extended to up to 125 days if the panel notifies the parties that it
cannot meet the 100 day deadline. The parties can request that the
panel of experts review particular aspects of the report within 25 days
of its delivery. If there is no request to review, then the interim report
becomes the final report. If there is a review, then the panel of experts
needs to deliver a final report within 175 days of its initial
establishment. This can be extended to up to 195 days if the chair
notifies the parties that the earlier deadline cannot be met. These
timelines are longer than those set out in Part Six, Title One for
arbitration tribunals. The deliberations of tribunals can be extended to a
maximum of 160 days.
The final report of the Panel of Experts will be made public. The interim
and final reports will set out the findings of fact and whether the
responding party has complied with its obligations, together with
reasoning behind the findings.
Article 409 (19) provides that provisions of Title I of Part Six, relating to
the establishment and workings of the arbitration tribunals, will apply to
the work of the panel of experts unless otherwise provided by the
Article.
143

Following a period of provisional application, the TCA fully entered into force on
1 May 2021. The various bodies set up in the Part One governance provisions had
not met during the period of provisional application, but were expected to become
fully operational once the TCA was fully applied.

63 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

Panel recommendations and compliance
Article 409 (9) states that the parties “share the understanding that if
the Panel makes recommendations in its report, the respondent party
does not need to follow these recommendations in ensuring conformity
with the Agreement”. This contrasts with Article 754 relating to the
arbitration tribunal’s rulings which “shall be binding” on the EU and
UK.
Subsequent paragraphs in Article 409 nevertheless provide for further
recourse to the panel of experts where the parties disagree on how the
responding party should conform with its obligations. Under Article
410, the complaining party can then revert to the Part Six provisions for
temporary remedies (including suspension of obligations) where the
responding party does not comply with obligations. 144
Article 409 (16) provides that if the final report of the panel determines
that a party has not conformed with its obligations under the relevant
chapter, the parties shall, within 90 days of the delivery of the final
report, discuss appropriate measures to be implemented. The
respondent party has to inform the complaining party, and its domestic
advisory groups, within 105 days of the report being delivered of its
decision on any measures to be implemented.
Article 409 (18) provides that where the parties disagree on measures to
be taken the complaining party may request that the panel of experts
decide on the matter. The panel of experts will deliver its findings within
45 days of this request.
Article 410 provides that the provisions for temporary remedies (Article
749) and for review of measures to comply with temporary remedies
(Article 750) as set out in Part Six will apply (mutatis mutandis) 145 to
disputes in Chapter 6 (labour and social standards) and Chapter 7
(environment and climate). Furthermore it states that the parties
recognise that the remedies (including suspension of obligations and
potentially cross-retaliation) authorised under Article 749 are available
to the complaining party where the responding party does not conform
with the report of the panel of experts. Article 749 and 750 are
explained in more detail below.

Cross-retaliation for non-compliance
Under Article 749 a complaining party may suspend certain provisions
of the Agreement if a respondent party does not comply with an
arbitration tribunal. The complaining party also has the option of
requesting “temporary compensation”. It can then suspend obligations
under the Agreement where there is no agreement between the two
parties on what the compensation should be. It can also decide not to

The Government’s summary explainer on the TCA explains the Article as “tailored
provisions” in relation to which “(a)ny recommendations made by the Panel of
Experts are not binding on the Parties”.
145
Article 410 (2) states that Articles 749 and 750 shall apply mutatis mutandis. Mutatis
mutandis can be understood as meaning with the necessary changes having been
made or with consideration of the respective differences.
144

64 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

request compensation and instead notify the responding party that it is
suspending treaty obligations.
The notification shall specify the level of intended suspension of
obligation. This can involve cross-retaliation across the trade, aviation,
road transport and fisheries headings of Part Two, although retaliation
should initially be considered within the same heading.
Article 749 (6) states that if the arbitration tribunal has ruled that there
has been a violation in Heading One (trade) or Heading Three (road
transport) of Part Two, the suspension may be applied in another title of
the same heading “in particular if the complaining party is of the view
that such suspension is effective in inducing compliance”.
Furthermore Article 749 (8) provides that in Heading One (trade),
Heading Two (aviation), Heading Three (road transport) or Heading Five
(fisheries) of Part Two:
if the complaining party considers that it is not practicable or
effective to suspend obligations within the same Heading as that
in which the arbitration tribunal has found the violation, and that
the circumstances are serious enough, it may seek to suspend
obligations under other covered provisions.

The complaining party needs to state the reasons for its decision. The
suspension of obligations can commence 10 days after the complaining
party has sent the notification of intended suspension.
Certain parts of the Agreement cannot be suspended under this Article.
These are those parts of the TCA not covered by the Part Six provisions
(for example the Part Three law enforcement and judicial cooperation
provisions) and the social security coordination provisions. Suspension of
obligations in relation to EU programmes or financial services
commitments can only be applied in relation to disputes under those
provisions (cross-retaliation does not apply). 146
Arbitration on suspension of obligations
The suspension of obligations “shall not exceed the level equivalent to
the nullification or impairment caused by the violation”. If the
respondent party considers that the notified level of suspension of
obligations exceeds this level or that any proposed cross-suspension
under the aviation heading or across the different headings identified in
does not meet the principles or follow the procedures allowing for such
cross-suspension then it can request an arbitration tribunal ruling on the
matter. This needs to be done within the 10 day period following
notification of the intended suspension. The arbitration tribunal will
deliver its decision on this within 30 days. Obligations cannot be
suspended until the arbitration tribunal has delivered its decision (Article
749 (11)).
The arbitration tribunal will rule on whether the intended suspension of
obligations meets the equivalence criteria and, where applicable, the
principles and procedures allowing for cross-suspension (Article 749
146

See sections 4.2 and 4.3 of Commons Library briefing 9139, The UK-EU Trade and
Cooperation Agreement: governance and dispute settlement for more detail.

65 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

(12)). Its decision will be final, and suspension of obligations shall be
consistent with the decision. This may require the complaining party to
adjust its proposed suspension measures.
Compliance following temporary remedies
The suspension of obligations or the compensation initially referred to is
intended to be temporary. They will apply until one of the following
occurs:
•

the parties have “reached a mutually agreed solution”

•

the parties have agreed that a measure taken brings the
respondent party into compliance with the covered provisions, or

•

relevant measures have been withdrawn or amended in order to
bring the respondent party into compliance (Article 749 (13)).

Article 750 provides for review of measures taken to comply after the
adoption of temporary remedies. Where a respondent party has taken
measures to comply following the suspension of obligations or
application of temporary compensation, it needs to notify the
complaining party. The complaining party will then terminate the
suspension of obligations within 30 days. It may also terminate the
application of compensation. However, if the parties do not reach
agreement on whether compliance has been achieved within 30 days of
the responding party notifying that is has taken the measures to
comply, then the complaining party will request a decision from the
arbitration tribunal on this. The tribunal will deliver its decision on this
within 46 days of this request. If the tribunal finds that compliance has
been achieved, then the suspension of obligations or compensation
shall be terminated. The level of suspension of obligations or of
compensation can also be adjusted in light of the tribunal decision.

8.4 Provisions for subsidies
As described in further detail in section 3.6 above, the Agreement
contains some bespoke provisions to address any disputes on subsidies.
Disputes about compliance with the requirements may be addressed by
consultation (Article 370) or engaging the Trade Specialised Committee
on Level Playing Field. In addition, the Article 374 dispute settlement
mechanism allows for temporary unilateral remedies taken in response
to individual subsidies which have a significant negative effect on UK-EU
trade and investment. These remedies are subject to arbitration. The
related Article 411 rebalancing and review mechanisms described in the
following sections also apply.

8.5 Rebalancing mechanism
The key to resolving differences between the UK and EU over the
enforcement of commitments on the level playing field was the
rebalancing mechanism.

66 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

Agreement on this mechanism
While other governance and dispute settlement provisions in the TCA
can be compared to those found in other trade agreements, Dr Holger
Hestermeyer has described the rebalancing mechanism as “utterly novel
and remarkable”. 147
In her press conference announcing the TCA, Commission President
Ursula von der Leyen stated that the agreed level playing field measures
would mean “the EU´s rules and standards will be respected” and it
would “have effective tools to react if fair competition is distorted and
impacts our trade”. 148
Article 411 (1) to (3) sets out the mechanism. It recognises the right of
either party to determine their own future policies in relation to labour,
environmental and climate protection and subsidy control (Article 411
(1)). But it provides for a mechanism for either party to take
“appropriate rebalancing measures” if there are “material impacts” on
trade or investment between the parties arising as a result of significant
divergences between the parties in these areas (Article 411 (2)). These
measures should be restricted in scope and duration to “what is strictly
necessary and proportionate in order to remedy the situation” with
priority given to measures that least disturb the functioning of the
Agreement.
Where a party wishes to impose a rebalancing measure, the following
procedure set out in Article 411 (3) applies:
a.

The concerned party notifies the other party through the
Partnership Council of the rebalancing measures it intends
to take, providing all relevant information. Consultations
then commence and are deemed concluded within 14 days
from the notification.

b.

If no mutually acceptable solution is found, the concerned
party may adopt rebalancing measures no sooner than five
days from the conclusion of the consultations, unless the
notified party requests the establishment of an arbitration
tribunal within the same five day period. This would be
based on the Part Six dispute settlement provisions for
establishment of a tribunal, but Article 760 which sets out a
bespoke expedited process for establishing an arbitration
tribunal for the purposes of Article 374 (remedial measures
in the subsidy control chapter) and Article 411 applies here.
This includes a two day period to appoint a tribunal, and a
further two day period deadline to hold its first meeting
(rather than seven) and a seven day deadline for the
complaining party to submit its case (rather than 20). 149

See HL European Union Committee, Uncorrected oral evidence: Future UK-EU
relations: governance, 2 February 2021, Q8
148
See also European Commission Press release, 24 December 2020
149
See Commons Library briefing 9139, The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement:
governance and dispute settlement, section 4.4
147

67 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

c.

The tribunal shall deliver its final ruling within 30 days of its
establishment. If it does not deliver its final ruling within this
time period, the concerned party may adopt the rebalancing
measures from three days after the expiry of the 30 day
period. The other party can then take proportionate
countermeasures until the tribunal delivers its ruling. Priority
shall be given to such countermeasures as will least disturb
the functioning of this Agreement.

d.

Where the arbitration tribunal finds that the rebalancing
measure by the concerned party is consistent with the
“material impact” criteria set out in Article 411 (2), then the
concerned party can adopt the rebalancing measure.

e.

If the arbitration tribunal has found the rebalancing
measures to be inconsistent with the “material impact”
criteria, then the concerned party will need to withdraw or
adjust its proposed measure and notify the other party what
it intends to do within three days.

In relation to compliance or non-compliance with the tribunal ruling,
relevant articles of the Part Six dispute settlement provisions apply in the
same way. These are:
•

Article 748 (2) [Compliance review] enabling the complaining party
(in this case the party that has been notified of rebalancing
measures and had requested the tribunal ruling) to seek a further
ruling on whether the notified measures are in compliance with
tribunal ruling.

•

Article 749 [Temporary remedies] allowing the complaining party to
request “temporary compensation” or suspend certain provisions of
the Agreement. This includes the possibility of cross-retaliation
across different parts of the Agreement, and provisions allowing the
responding party to seek a ruling from the tribunal on whether
these measures are proportionate (see explanation of Article 749 in
section 8.3).

•

Article 750 [Review of any measure taken to comply after the
adoption of temporary remedies] allowing the complaining party to
seek another ruling from the arbitration panel on whether
compliance has been achieved.

When applied in Article 411 (3) these procedures “shall have no
suspensive effect on the application of the notified measures pursuant
to this paragraph”.
f.

Where rebalancing measures were adopted prior to the
arbitration ruling in accordance with point (c), any
countermeasures adopted pursuant to that point shall be
withdrawn immediately, and in no case later than five days
after delivery of the tribunal ruling.

g.

Neither of the parties can invoke the WTO Agreement or
any other international agreement to preclude the other
party from taking rebalancing measures or countermeasures
under this Article.

68 The UK-EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement: Level Playing Field

h.

If the notified party has not requested a ruling from an
arbitration panel in the time period set out under point (b)
then it can initiate the arbitration procedure set out in Part
Six but without the need for prior consultations in the
Partnership Council, and Article 744 [Urgent proceedings]
will be applied. This means the tribunal would need to
deliver a ruling within 65 days, and an interim report within
50 days.

Also of relevance to this article is Article 762 which states that where a
party takes a measure under treaty articles including Article 411, then
the measure shall only be applied in respect of covered provisions within
the meaning of Article 735 (those parts of the Agreement covered by
the Part Six dispute settlement provisions) and shall comply in the same
way (mutatis mutandis) with the conditions set out in Article 749 (3).
The latter exempts certain parts of the TCA from cross-retaliation,
meaning that cross-retaliation would be possible across the areas not
exempt (see section 8.3 for explanation of covered and exempt
provisions for the purpose of cross-retaliation).

8.6 Review provisions
Paragraphs 4 to 11 of Article 411 provide for a possible review of the
Trade heading of the TCA. This review mechanism opens up the
possibility of the entire trade part of the agreement being suspended in
case of a persistent dispute. The road transport would be terminated
alongside the trade provisions. The aviation heading could also possibly
be terminated.
Under Article 411 (4) a review can take place no sooner than four years
after the entry of force of the TCA at a party’s request. Under Article
411 (5) a review can take place sooner than four years at the request of
a party under more specific circumstances: this would be if the party
feels that measures under the rebalancing mechanism have been taken
too frequently or if a measure with a material impact on trade or
investment between the parties has been applied for a period of 12
months or more. The parties can agree that other Agreement headings
be added to the review.
There can be repeated reviews, but these need to be at least four years
apart (Article 411 (7)). Reviews will address whether the TCA “delivers
an appropriate balance of rights and obligations between the Parties”
and whether there is a need for the terms of the Agreement to be
modified.
Where a party considers that following the review there is a need for a
treaty amendment then the parties “shall use their best endeavours to
negotiate and conclude an agreement making the necessary
amendments”. The negotiations will be limited to matters identified in
the review. If an amending agreement has not been concluded after
one year of these negotiations, then either party may give notice to
terminate Heading One (trade) or any other Agreement heading that
had been added to the review. Alternatively, the parties may decide to

69 Commons Library Briefing, 20 May 2021

continue negotiations. If a party terminates Heading One (trade)
following this process, then Heading Three (road transport) shall be
terminated on the same date. The termination will take place three
months after notice has been given. Where the trade heading has been
terminated, Heading Two (aviation) will also be terminated unless the
parties agree to integrate the relevant parts of the Title XI level playing
field provisions into the aviation heading.
For further detail on the governance and dispute settlement
mechanisms in the TCA, and the bespoke provisions for the level playing
field, see Commons Library briefing 9139, The UK-EU Trade and
Cooperation Agreement: governance and dispute settlement.

About the Library
The House of Commons Library research service provides MPs and their staff
with the impartial briefing and evidence base they need to do their work in
scrutinising Government, proposing legislation, and supporting constituents.
As well as providing MPs with a confidential service we publish open briefing
papers, which are available on the Parliament website.
Every effort is made to ensure that the information contained in these publicly
available research briefings is correct at the time of publication. Readers should
be aware however that briefings are not necessarily updated or otherwise
amended to reflect subsequent changes.
If you have any comments on our briefings please email papers@parliament.uk.
Authors are available to discuss the content of this briefing only with Members
and their staff.
If you have any general questions about the work of the House of Commons
you can email hcenquiries@parliament.uk.

Disclaimer
This information is provided to Members of Parliament in support of their
parliamentary duties. It is a general briefing only and should not be relied on as
a substitute for specific advice. The House of Commons or the author(s) shall
not be liable for any errors or omissions, or for any loss or damage of any kind
arising from its use, and may remove, vary or amend any information at any
time without prior notice.

BRIEFING PAPER
Number 9190
20 May 2021

The House of Commons accepts no responsibility for any references or links to,
or the content of, information maintained by third parties. This information is
provided subject to the conditions of the Open Parliament Licence.

