House of Commons
Treasury Committee

Net zero and the Future
of Green Finance
Thirteenth Report of Session 2019–21
Report, together with formal minutes relating
to the report
Ordered by the House of Commons
to be printed 14 April 2021

HC 147

Published on 22 April 2021
by authority of the House of Commons

The Treasury Committee
The Treasury Committee is appointed by the House of Commons to examine the
expenditure, administration, and policy of HM Treasury, HM Revenue and Customs
and associated public bodies.
Current Membership

Mel Stride MP (Chair) (Conservative, Central Devon)
Rushanara Ali MP (Labour, Bethnal Green and Bow)
Steve Baker MP (Conservative, Wycombe)
Harriett Baldwin MP (Conservative, West Worcestershire)
Anthony Browne MP (Conservative, South Cambridgeshire)
Felicity Buchan MP (Conservative, Kensington)
Dame Angela Eagle MP (Labour, Wallasey)
Julie Marson MP (Conservative, Hertford and Stortford)
Siobhain McDonagh MP (Labour, Mitcham and Morden)
Alison Thewliss MP (Scottish National Party, Glasgow Central)
The following was also a Member of the Committee during this session: Mike Hill MP
(Labour, Hartlepool).
Powers

The committee is one of the departmental select committees, the powers of which
are set out in House of Commons Standing Orders, principally in SO No. 152. These
are available on the internet via www.parliament.uk.
Publication

© Parliamentary Copyright House of Commons 2021. This publication may be
reproduced under the terms of the Open Parliament Licence, which is published at
www.parliament.uk/site-information/copyright-parliament/.
Committee reports are published on the Committee’s website at
www.parliament.uk/treascom/ and in print by Order of the House.
Committee staff

The current staff of the Committee are Jack Dent (Second Clerk), Rachel Edwards
(on secondment from the Bank of England), Kenneth Fox (Clerk), Dan Lee (Senior
Economist), Cat Melvin (on secondment from the Financial Conduct Authority),
Aruni Muthumala (Senior Economist), Moyo Oyelade (on secondment from the
Bank of England), Matt Panteli (Senior Media and Policy Officer), Tony Verran (on
secondment from HM Revenue & Customs), Adam Wales (Chief Policy Adviser),
Maciej Wenerski (Committee Operations Manager), Jesse Williams (Committee
Operations Officer),and Marcus Wilton (Senior Economist).
Contacts

All correspondence should be addressed to the Clerk of the Treasury
Committee, House of Commons, London SW1A 0AA. The telephone number
for general enquiries is 020 7219 5769; the Committee’s email address is
treascom@parliament.uk.
You can follow the Committee on Twitter using @commonstreasury.

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

1

Contents
Summary3
Introduction6

1

The Government’s decision to legislate for net zero

6

Our inquiry

6

The economic opportunities and costs of net zero

8

Green finance: an economic opportunity

8

Economic recovery: taking a “green” approach

9

‘Building back greener’ post coronavirus

9

Government decision making and the Net Zero Review

2

3

11

Co-ordination of Government effort

13

Spending reviews

13

Uncertainty of costs

14

Regional impact of transition to net zero on high carbon industries

17

Green finance to support decarbonisation

19

The importance of utilising private finance

19

Long term policy certainty for investors

19

Green gilts

20

Greening central banking

22

Long-term Asset Fund

24

Solvency II

26

National Infrastructure Bank

26

The role of consumers

30

The importance of consumer choice

30

Consumer inertia and a lack of choice

30

Defined contribution pensions

30

Requirements on workplace pension scheme trustees

33

Appropriate transparency for consumers and ‘Greenwashing’

35

Greenwashing35

4

Climate risk labels

36

Passive investments and indices

37

Green product innovation

39

Regulators and regulation

42

Remit of the Prudential Regulation Committee and the Financial Conduct Authority42

Prudential risks and the capital regime

43

TCFD implementation and mainstreaming of green finance

46

Sustainable taxonomy

49

Conclusions and recommendations

52

Formal minutes

56

Witnesses (2017–19 session)

57

Published written evidence (2017–19 session)

58

Witnesses (2019–21 session)

62

Published written evidence (2019–21 session)

63

List of Reports from the Committee during the current Parliament

66

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Summary
Decarbonisation and Net Zero
The Government has made bold claims that the economic recovery will be a green
recovery. In order to achieve that, the Government needs to set out in its Net Zero
Strategy who, at ministerial level, will be responsible for delivering net zero, coordinating
the roles of different departments, and ensuring that the UK remains on track to meet
its net zero target in a cost-effective way.
In the Net Zero Review final report, the Government should set out what mechanisms
it will put in place to integrate the net zero target within departments’ spending review
commitments, and how departments will be held to account should they fail to meet
their targets.
The Chancellor should publish the Net Zero Strategy as soon as possible and should set
out, in conjunction with the Net Zero Review final report, the principles upon which
the UK will fund its transition to net zero carbon emissions by 2050.
There are a number of different estimates of the cost of achieving net zero by 2050.
However, the Government has not yet committed to its own cost estimates and should
set these out as soon as possible. The Government should include in the Net Zero
Review final report its own methodology on costs; and it should set out clearly where
the uncertainties lie. The Treasury should also include a range of scenarios on how net
zero might be achieved, and the associated cost for each scenario.
The Treasury’s Net Zero Review final report should include clear sectoral pathways
towards decarbonisation and should address the key policy decisions as to the future
of high carbon industries. Particular attention should be given to the potential regional
impact of those decisions and the Government should set out a framework and strategy
for supporting those communities which will be most impacted by these changes. This
is especially important given the Government’s commitment to a Just Transition as part
of the Paris Agreement.
Private finance
The Government has recognised that private finance will need to play a key part in
funding the transition to net zero. If it is to do so, the Government will need to provide
long-term certainty in climate-related policy and must ensure that consistent policy
signals are sent to investors. We are encouraged that the Government acknowledged
these needs in the 2021 Budget.
We welcome the announcement in the 2021 Budget of a timetable for the issuance of
the UK’s first green sovereign bond or ‘green gilt’. However, the UK is lagging behind
other countries in the issuance of these green bonds. This runs the risk of holding back
the development of a private sterling green bond market. Although concerns about the
potential for green bonds to be a more expensive form of debt for the Government
seem to have dissipated to a degree, the Government should none the less set out its
tolerance, when issuing such bonds, for them to be more expensive than other forms of
Government debt.

3

4

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

The Treasury should, as part of its review of Solvency II, consider reforms that could
improve the funding of sustainable green infrastructure while maintaining the financial
stability of insurers.
In the proposed framework for the new UK Infrastructure Bank, the Chancellor should
clarify its governance arrangements, how investment decisions will be made, and how it
will ensure that it attracts sufficient private capital. In particular, it should clearly set out
how the Bank will meet the Government’s commitment to Net Zero. The Government
should also set out how it will incorporate lessons learned from the former Green
Investment Bank, and whether it intends that the UK Infrastructure Bank should
be funded to offer a lending facility at a level similar to that offered by the European
Investment Bank before the UK referendum on membership of the EU.
Consumer choice
There is a high level of inertia amongst consumers around defined contribution pension
fund choice, with most remaining in the ‘default’ fund. The Treasury has been robust in
its view that default funds should not be required to move to more green alternatives, but
at the same time maintains that consumers should not have to switch out of the default
to invest sustainably. The Government should resolve this apparent contradiction.
The Treasury should report regularly on the proportion of pension holders in defined
contribution pension schemes who remain in the default fund, and the extent to which
those default funds are aligned with a path to Net Zero.
Financial products should be clearly labelled to allow consumers to assess the relative
climate impacts of products and to make choices accordingly. However, allowing every
firm to create its own consumer sustainability labels may lead to inconsistencies and
consumer confusion. The Treasury and the Financial Conduct Authority should consult
on the merits of making climate or carbon labels for consumer financial products
mandatory, as a means to encourage innovation. The FCA should consult on how best
to make such labels readily and widely understood.
We note the concerns expressed about indices, in that the most popular may be carbonintensive, and those that purport to be green may have carbon-intensive constituents.
The risk remains that many consumers are unaware of the carbon-intensity of the
indices that their passive investments are tracking. The Treasury and regulators should
therefore ensure that all indices (whether conventional or climate-friendly) clearly set
out the overall carbon footprint of the assets included within indices.
On the concerns around the constituents of indices described as ‘green’, we note
the requirements under the Benchmarks Regulation, which should be used to help
consumers make better choices. However, it is clear that in some cases the labels or
descriptions of ‘green’ or ‘climate-related’ indices do not necessarily match legitimate
consumer expectations of what they would commonly be understood to mean. The
Treasury and FCA should review the provisions in the legislative and regulatory
framework and ensure that the labels and descriptions of indices accurately reflect their
content, in line with consumer expectations.
The Government’s Green Finance Strategy noted the need for innovation in green
finance products and services, yet the evidence we have received suggests that the pace

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

of innovation could be accelerated and that more could be done to encourage takeup. The Financial Conduct Authority should seriously consider undertaking further
“green fintech challenges” to encourage innovation. The regulator should also set out
how it will tackle remaining regulatory barriers which discourage innovative ‘green’
financial products from coming to market. The Government and the regulators should
work more closely with the Green Finance Institute to bring innovative ideas which will
benefit consumers to the market.
Mainstreaming Green Finance
The Prudential Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Authority should move
quickly to incorporate their revised remits to include climate change. We will continue
to monitor their progress and ongoing approach to the risks arising from climate change.
We have heard differing evidence on whether there should be amendments to the
capital regimes to promote net zero. In light of its new remit letter, the Bank of England
must now explain its thinking, as to what measures it might consider appropriate for
the capital regime to better accommodate the climate risk associated with different
investments. It should set out its views on the options for amending the capital regimes
to reflect its new remit, taking into account the potential interaction with the other
aims of prudential policy.
The Government has moved from a voluntary to a mandatory approach for ensuring
that firms make climate-related financial disclosures. But the process will be run to
different timetables for different firms, across different regulators according to the
Roadmap published by the Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce. The Treasury,
via the Taskforce, will need to play a key role in ensuring that pressure is maintained for
a consistent and rapid implementation of these disclosures.
We also draw the Treasury’s attention to evidence suggesting that the disclosure regime
could be widened in scope, and that firms might usefully offer fuller disclosures.
A taxonomy is an important part of identifying what can be considered green
investment, so the announcement of a UK taxonomy is welcome. The Treasury and
regulators should work at speed to ensure that there is a clear timetable and legislative
pathway to deliver a UK taxonomy ahead of COP26 in November 2021. The UK can
utilise the EU’s taxonomy but can exceed it when it will assist the UK’s goals. The UK
should seize the opportunity presented by COP26 to use its own work on a taxonomy
to push for greater international convergence.

5

6

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Introduction
The Government’s decision to legislate for net zero
1. On 12 June 2019, the Rt Hon. Theresa May MP (then Prime Minister) announced
that the UK would eradicate its net contribution to greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.1 A
statutory instrument2 was laid before Parliament on the same day, seeking to amend the
Climate Change Act 2008 to enshrine this target in legislation. The Government said that
the UK was therefore the first G7 country to legislate for net zero emissions.3
2. On 2 July 2019, the Government published its Green Finance Strategy, which had two
objectives:
•

To align private sector financial flows with clean, environmentally sustainable
and resilient growth, supported by Government action.

•

To strengthen the competitiveness of the UK financial sector.4

3. This Report, which is concerned mainly with the development of Green Finance in
the face of the Government’s legislative Net Zero target, is published with two particular
catalysts for action in mind. Firstly, in November 2021, the UK will host the 26th UN
Climate Change Conference (COP 26), which will bring parties together to accelerate
action towards the goals of the Paris Agreement and the UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change.5 Secondly, the Treasury has indicated that in 2022 there will be a
“refresh” of the Green Finance Strategy.6

Our inquiry
4. The previous Treasury Committee launched an inquiry into the Decarbonisation of
the UK economy and green finance in June 2019,7 and it published terms of reference8
seeking evidence on:
•

the potential economic opportunity offered by decarbonisation,

•

the Treasury’s strategy in facilitating clean growth and its response to the
Climate Change Committee’s net-zero recommendation, and

•

green finance.

The previous Committee received written evidence from interested parties for this first
phase of the inquiry and held three oral evidence sessions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

UK Parliament, ‘Government gives details on setting a UK net zero emissions target’, accessed 11 February 2021
The Climate Change Act 2008 (2050 Target Amendment) Order 2019
UK Parliament, ‘Government gives details on setting a UK net zero emissions target’, accessed 11 February 2021
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 7
UK COP 26, ‘UN Climate Change Conference UK 2021’, accessed 19 February 2021
HM Treasury, A Roadmap towards mandatory climate-related disclosures, November 2020, Para 1.21
Treasury Select Committee, ‘Committee launch inquiry into decarbonisation of the UK economy’, accessed 11
February 2021
Treasury Select Committee, ‘Decarbonisation of the UK economy and Green Finance terms of reference’,
accessed 11 February 2021

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

7

5. After the 2019 General Election and the establishment of the present Committee, we
re-launched the inquiry9 in July 2020 with revised terms of reference, in the light of the
coronavirus pandemic and our work on the economic impact of coronavirus. We received
further written evidence from a variety of interested parties, including members of the
general public, trade associations, the finance industry and businesses. The further four
oral evidence sessions of the second phase of this inquiry focused on a post-coronavirus
green recovery, green infrastructure and the way in which private finance could help the
Government meet its net zero emissions target.
6. We are grateful to all those who submitted written evidence and those who gave oral
evidence, including business and financial services experts, economists, representatives
from the Bank of England, Financial Conduct Authority, the Pensions Regulator,
the Economic Secretary to the Treasury and the Exchequer Secretary to the Treasury.
Transcripts of oral evidence and published written evidence can be found on our webpages.
7. We note also the valuable work of the Environmental Audit Committee in this field,
most recently through its Third Report of this Session, Growing back better: putting nature
and net zero at the heart of the economic recovery.10

9
10

Treasury Select Committee, ‘Decarbonisation of the UK economy and green finance inquiry relaunched’,
accessed 11 February 2021
Environmental Audit Committee, Third Report of Session 2019–21, Growing back better putting nature and net
zero at the heart of the economic recovery, HC 347

8

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

1 The economic opportunities and costs
of net zero
Green finance: an economic opportunity
8. In the Green Finance Strategy, launched in July 2019, the Government argued that
“leadership on green finance will enable the UK to maximise the economic opportunities
of the global and domestic shifts to clean and resilient growth.”11
9. The previous Committee heard evidence that decarbonising the economy could
provide the UK with a substantial economic opportunity, both in terms of economic
advantage that might be gained through new low carbon technologies, and globally,
if the UK could establish the City of London as a leading centre for green finance and
other green industries. We use the term “green finance” in this report to encompass the
mobilisation of private finance for clean and resilient growth, the incorporation of climate
and environmental factors within investment decisions, and the development of “green”
financial products.12
10. Sagarika Chatterjee, Director of Climate Change, Principles for Responsible
Investment,13 told us that “[…] there is still a very strong opportunity for the UK and the
City of London to lead on this. There are strong commercial and trading opportunities,
particularly from the green finance side. The City of London, as well as, more broadly,
Edinburgh and many other areas of the UK, should be the No. 1 place for green finance”.14
11. Action to develop “green” finance in the UK could have consequences outside the UK,
because of the international nature of the City. Positive Money, a not-for-profit research
and campaigning organisation seeking to “make money and banking work for society”,15
told the previous Committee that while the UK is responsible for approximately 1% of
global CO2 emissions, the City of London “hosts and finances companies which account
for a minimum of around 15% of potential global CO2 emissions, and the financial carbon
footprint of the UK is 100 times its own fossil fuel reserves”.16
12. John Glen MP, Economic Secretary to the Treasury, confirmed that there is “a
significant appetite for people to invest in sustainable financial products”17 and that there
were “new technologies that give us faster routes to that net zero goal”.18 Similarly, Kemi
Badenoch MP, Exchequer Secretary to the Treasury, argued that there was also export
potential: “If we can do this right and become world leaders in carbon capture storage,
hydrogen and offshore wind, we can export these technologies […] There are benefits to
making sure we get a march on and can be world leading in this space.”19
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19

HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 6
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 7 - 11
Principles for Responsible Investment is an independent membership body for institutional investors supported
by the United Nations
Oral evidence taken on 2 July 2019, HC 2233 (2017–19), Q14 [Sagarika Chatterjee]
Positive Money, ‘Making money and banking work for society’, accessed 8 April 2021
Positive Money, (DUE0063) para 4.3
Q253
Q253
Q253

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

9

Economic recovery: taking a “green” approach
13. The development of the UK as a centre for green finance is an opportunity which
could be identified in advance and planned for. The coronavirus pandemic, on the other
hand, was quite unforeseen; but it has in its way offered a quite different sort of opportunity,
by forcing policymakers to think about how to build sustainability and “green” spending
into planning for an economic recovery. This Report now looks at what the Government
has already done in that respect, and what more it could do to co-ordinate that effort and
to influence Government departments in planning their activities and spending so as to
assist in meeting the net zero target.
‘Building back greener’ post coronavirus
14. While the Government’s focus over the last year has been the coronavirus pandemic,
it has also prioritised achieving economic recovery in line with the UK’s net zero target.
In June 2020, the Prime Minister committed the UK to “build back better, build back
greener, build back faster”.20 Similarly, in his statement to the House on the Plan for Jobs
in July 2020, the Chancellor announced that “this will be a green recovery, with concern
for our environment at its heart, and as part of that, I am announcing today a new £2
billion green homes grant”.21 He went on to say that he was “releasing £1 billion of funding
to improve the energy efficiency of public sector buildings, alongside a £50 million fund to
pilot the right approach to decarbonise social housing”. He argued that this was therefore
a “£3 billion green jobs plan to save money, cut carbon and create jobs”.22
15. The Prime Minister’s speech to the Conservative Party Conference in October 2020
highlighted the Government’s commitment to “the green economy, the green industrial
revolution that in the next ten years will create hundreds of thousands if not millions of
jobs” and announced plans for the UK to become a “world leader in low cost clean power
generation”.23 In November 2020, the Prime Minister published a ‘Ten Point Plan’ for a
green industrial revolution, which included a focus on “Innovation and finance”.24 The
Chancellor of the Exchequer supported this commitment to a green industrial revolution
with a number of ‘green’ spending commitments in the November 2020 joint Autumn
Statement and Spending Review.25
16. We heard evidence which supported “green” spending measures as a means of
supporting the UK’s economic recovery. Professor Nick Robins, Professor in Practice for
Sustainable Finance, Grantham Research Institute, London School of Economics, noted
that:
… through the Covid crisis, we have seen a greater recognition, particularly
from the financial sector but also from the corporate sector and the world
of policy, that the way out of this crisis is to move in a more accelerated
fashion to the economy of the future, one which is net zero, resilient and
20
21
22
23
24
25

“PM: A New Deal for Britain”, Prime Minister’s Office, 10 Downing Street and The Rt Hon Boris Johnson MP,
press release, 30 June 2020
HC Deb, 8 July 2020, col 976 [Commons Chamber]
HC Deb, 8 July 2020, col 976 [Commons Chamber]
The Conservative Party, ‘Boris Johnson: Read the Prime Minister’s Keynote Speech in full’, accessed 12 February
2021
“Prime Minister Boris Johnson outlines his Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution for 250,000 jobs”,
Prime Minister’s Office, 10 Downing Street and The Rt Hon Boris Johnson MP, press release, 18 November 2020
HM Treasury, Spending Review 2020, CP 330, November 2020, para. 29

10

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

more inclusive. We have a legal commitment to that in the UK, particularly
to net zero. That would imply that we would want to see funds that are
allocated to business in this crisis being done in a way that is consistent
with net zero.26
17. Dr Emily Shuckburgh OBE, Director of Cambridge Zero, at the University of
Cambridge, told us that “the key question is whether it is a cost to the overall economy.
There is plenty of evidence, looking at past investments, that green investments give you
a really strong multiplier in exactly these circumstances.”27 Dr Shuckburgh further noted
that green investments made good economic and fiscal sense because “[…] if we do not
look at putting in place both the jobs and the infrastructure that are relevant to the future,
we will be putting money into things that are stranded, in the sense of jobs or assets that
do not have any future”.28
18. We also heard evidence supporting the imposition of “green” conditions on the
provision of recovery financing for businesses. Professor Robins told us that this could
be done in two ways: either by looking at past performance and the carbon or pollution
intensity of the business, or by linking to a company’s commitment to net zero and social
commitments, such as retraining of workers.29
19. However, when asked about conditionality, Chris Cummings, CEO of the Investment
Association, was more cautionary. He told us that:
We are trying to strike the right balance between making sure that the
businesses we are investing in are responding to climate change, and
setting a course for correction and improvement where necessary, without
imposing costs on them, particularly at this time, that could be difficult and
could make the difference between the long-term sustainability we want
and too much short-term pain.30
20. The Government’s main business lending programmes in the coronavirus crisis—
Bounceback loans, Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan Scheme (CBILS) and
Coronavirus Large Business Interruption Loan Scheme (CLBILS)—did not have “green”
conditions attached to them. However, in its support to Celsa Steel (UK), Alok Sharma
MP, then Secretary of State for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, told the House of
Commons that the Government had agreed legally binding contractual conditions with
Celsa on employment, climate change and tax.31
21. At Budget 2021, the Government announced a new “Recovery Loan Scheme” and set
out how it would operate:32
The Recovery Loan Scheme is to help businesses of any size access loans
and other kinds of finance so they can recover after the pandemic and
transition period.
26
27
28
29
30
31
32

Q61
Q63
Q63
Q61
Q64
Written Ministerial statement, 2 July 2020, HCWS332
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, ‘Guidance: Recovery Loan Scheme’,
accessed 9 April 2021

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

11

Up to £10 million is available per business. The actual amount offered and
the terms are at the discretion of participating lenders.
The government guarantees 80% of the finance to the lender. As the
borrower, you are always 100% liable for the debt.
The scheme is open until 31 December 2021, subject to review. Loans are
available through a network of accredited lenders, listed on the British
Business Bank’s website.33
22. At present, the Recovery Loan Scheme does not appear to have any green conditionality
attached to it. However, in its submission to our inquiry, Barclays noted that:
…via the British Business Bank, the Government already has a number of
schemes in place designed to stimulate wholesale lending post COVID-19,
e.g. the ENABLE guarantee, CBILS and CLBILS. With relatively simple
tweaks, these schemes can be adapted to focus on net zero blended finance
solutions. As a significant number of businesses focus on bridging their
short-term needs through the COVID-19 pandemic, now is an ideal time
for a focused, clear and green COVID-19 recovery program to marry up
with the closing of the CLBILS/CBILS window in September.34
23. Although the Government has emphasised the need for a “green” recovery, we
note it has not, except in limited circumstances, imposed green conditionality on the
support it has provided during the coronavirus pandemic. Whilst it is clear that support
schemes were required to be provided without delay the Treasury should set out why it
did not include green conditionality for the Recovery Loan Scheme announced in the
2021 Budget.

Government decision making and the Net Zero Review
24. In November 2019, the Treasury launched its Net Zero Review,35 which will consider
how the transition to net zero will be funded and will assess options for where the costs
will fall. The terms of reference set out what this will involve:
•

Analysing the range of choices for how households, businesses and the taxpayer
could contribute towards different elements of the transition to net zero.

•

Identifying mechanisms to create an equitable balance of contributions.

•

Maximising opportunities for economic growth as we transition to a green
economy

•

Evaluating the trade-offs between cost, competitiveness, effects on consumers
and impacts on the taxpayer.

25. An interim Net Zero Review report was published in December 2020, which sets
out the analysis undertaken so far, including on uncertainty of cost, policy levers, and
33
34
35

HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, ‘Guidance: Recovery Loan Scheme’,
accessed 9 April 2021
Barclays (DEC0052) p 2
HM Treasury, ‘Net Zero Review terms of reference,’ accessed 12 February 2021

12

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

household exposure, and seeks feedback ahead of the final report.36 The final report, which
will build on the interim report and which will be published in spring 2021, will look at:
•

Innovation and growth: How the government can reduce policy uncertainty to
encourage innovation, technological development and investment. It will look
at areas where the UK might have comparative advantage and consider how to
maximise the economic benefits.

•

Competitiveness: The scope for addressing the risks of carbon leakage and
competitiveness that may arise from the transition to net zero.

•

Household impacts: More detailed analysis of the implications for households
from the decarbonisation of transport, buildings and power and options for
managing any adverse impacts, as well as the trade-offs the government may
face.

•

Embedding the findings: How HM Treasury could incorporate climate
considerations into spending reviews and fiscal events and how to embed the
principles of the Net Zero Review into policy making across government.37

26. In 2019, the Treasury also commissioned the Dasgupta review on the Economics of
Biodiversity, to assess the economic benefits of biodiversity globally; the economic costs
and risks of biodiversity loss; and to identify a range of actions to enhance biodiversity
and deliver economic prosperity.38 The review’s final report, published in February 2021,
covers the impact of human economic growth and development on nature. One of the
report’s main conclusions is that nature’s importance is not reflected in market prices,
which has led to underinvestment in the world’s natural assets. The report recommended,
amongst other things:
•

Changing measures of economic success to guide policymakers on a more
sustainable path, including a measure of inclusive wealth which includes natural
assets; and introducing natural capital into national accounting systems to
improve decision-making; and

•

Ensuring that the financial system channels investment into economic activities
that enhance the stock of natural assets.39

27. Separate to the Net Zero Review final report, the Government has also committed
to providing a Net Zero Strategy40 which it says “will set out the Government’s vision for
transitioning to a net zero economy, making the most of new growth and employment
opportunities across the UK”.41

36
37
38
39
40
41

HM Treasury, Net Zero Review: Interim report, December 2020, p.3–5
HM Treasury, Net Zero Review: Interim report, December 2020, p 5–6
HM Treasury, ‘Collection The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review’, accessed 17 March 2021
HM Treasury, The Economics of Biodiversity: The Dasgupta Review Headline Messages, February 2021, p 4
HM Treasury, Net Zero Review interim report, December 2020, para 1.22
HM Government, The Government Response to the Committee on Climate Change’s 2020 Progress Report to
Parliament, October 2020, p 6

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

13

Co-ordination of Government effort
28. We heard that achieving net zero by 2050 would require the Government to conduct
joined-up and coherent decision and policy-making, with an important role to be
played by HM Treasury. Baroness Bryony Worthington, environmental campaigner and
Crossbench Life peer, told us that an integrated approach to decarbonising was necessary.
She told us:
The quality of our policies is imperative and the Treasury plays a central
role in that, in ensuring we join up the parts of Government. […] we still
spend a lot of money on certain sectors of the economy, including transport.
We need to see an integrated strategy of transport infrastructure that hits
multiple objectives: clean air, no greenhouse gases, and investment into our
industries with sustaining jobs.42
She noted though that “some of the lack of joined-up thinking is within Departments. It
is not just between Departments and the Treasury.”43
29. Lord Turner of Ecchinswell, Chairman of the Energy Transitions Commission, also
emphasised the important role of the Treasury, saying that “Treasury is in charge of taxes
and Treasury is in charge of public expenditure. Although there are many other tools
of policy required to build a zero-carbon economy, what the tax regime is and what the
public expenditure regime is are crucially important, so that needs to be integrated with
the overall strategy.”44
30. The Government has made bold claims that the economic recovery will be a
green recovery. In order to achieve that, the Government needs to set out in its Net
Zero Strategy who, at ministerial level, will be responsible for delivering net zero,
coordinating the roles of different departments, and ensuring that the UK remains on
track to meet its net zero target in a cost-effective way.
Spending reviews
31. We received evidence that the Government’s net zero target needs to be integrated
into the Government’s spending decisions. Written evidence from the World Wildlife
Foundation (WWF) proposed that the Treasury implement a ‘net zero test’ for spending
decisions, including at spending reviews and annual budgets. WWF also proposed a Fiscal
Resilience Rule as part of the Treasury’s fiscal framework review, which would “guide the
decision-making process for the Comprehensive Spending Review”, and ensure “that all
spending will be aligned with building the UK’s economic resilience”.45 WWF proposed
that the rule would encourage fiscal policy to address future risks to the UK economy,
including climate change.
32. The UK operates a system of carbon budgets: legally binding caps on greenhouse
emissions over a five-year period.46 Shortly after carbon budgets were introduced under
the 2008 Climate Change Act, Baroness Worthington wrote in the Guardian that:
42
43
44
45
46

Q2
Q5
Q3
World Wildlife Foundation (DEC0054) pp 1, 4, para 30
Climate Change Committee, ‘Advice on reducing the UK’s emissions’, accessed 9 April 2021

14

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

The principle behind carbon budgeting is simply that emissions must stay
within a pre-determined limit or compensating actions, such as payment
for emission reductions elsewhere, must be taken. This was meant to
engender the feeling that every tonne counts, since allowing an emission
to take place creates a liability against the budget, whereas, investing in
emissions savings effectively creates an asset.47
However, Baroness Worthington told us that in the implementation of carbon budgets
“one element that never really got implemented was that, if we are facing a deficit, as in we
are not meeting our targets, there is a potential monetary value to that […]”.48 Baroness
Worthington explained that “the point is getting the Treasury’s minds to think about this
in terms of liabilities, as in if we do not meet our targets we are creating a liability, and
assets, as in investments now that decrease that liability over time.”49
33. Kemi Badenoch MP, Exchequer Secretary to the Treasury, told us that it was her
intention to hold departments to account for their net zero spending: “We cannot have a
plan for net zero without Departments being fully engaged. It is a strategic priority […] All
of the various Departments need to take account of which actions help us reduce emissions.
This will be important to consider in the spending review. It will be an important part of
wider fiscal strategy.”50
34. It remains unclear to us, however, what mechanisms are in place within the spending
review process to provide incentives to departments to design their activity and spending
so as to meet the Government’s net zero target; nor was it clear to us what the consequences
would be for departments that did not do so.
35. In the Net Zero Review final report, the Government should set out what
mechanisms it will put in place to integrate the net zero target within departments’
spending review commitments, and how departments will be held to account should
they fail to meet their targets.

Uncertainty of costs
36. While a range of different estimates of the cost of achieving net zero have been
produced, the overall cost remains uncertain. In June 2019, it was reported that the Rt
Hon. Philip Hammond MP, then Chancellor, had suggested that the cost of net zero would
reach £1 trillion, and that analysis by the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial
Strategy had estimated the cost at £70 billion per year.51
37. We heard from Nick Mohlo, Director of Aldersgate Group, that:
it is difficult to comment on the precise figure because of the uncertainty
of looking 30 years out. There are obviously quite big uncertainties around
what the cost of finance would be, which would have a big bearing on the
overall cost.52
47
48
49
50
51
52

The dawn of carbon budgeting: now every tonne counts”, The Guardian, 14 July 2009
Q28
Q28
Q275
“UK net zero emissions target will ‘cost more than £1tn”, The Financial Times, 5 June 2019
Q6

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

15

Mr Mohlo added that his understanding of the Climate Change Committee’s analysis was
that the UK “would be looking at an actual resource cost of 1% to 2% of GDP to get to net
zero”. He explained that while there would be an increase in cost for some sectors, such
as low-carbon heating, costs would fall in other areas of the economy, such as transport,
where the Climate Change Committee estimated an annual reduction in cost of around
£5 billion.53
38. Lord Turner of Ecchinswell told us that “it is not completely absurd” that the cost to
achieve net zero by 2050 might be £1 trillion, but he noted that “by setting that figure up,
you are making people think, “I have to find £1 trillion in the Budget to pay for that”.54
In his view, the cost would be apportioned across the time period “at the end of which,
by 2050, people might have to accept being 1.5% worse off than they otherwise would be,
which if we are growing our economy at 1.75%, means that they will reach, in December
2050, the living standard that they would otherwise have reached in February 2050”.55
39. We also received written evidence from the Global Warming Policy Foundation
which set out concerns about the Government’s projected reliance on off-shore wind and
its associated costs, and particularly that “no official costings of the net zero project have
been published”.56 The Global Warming Policy Foundation called for the Treasury “to
prepare and publish a detailed and publicly accessible costing of the project”57 and noted
that the Foundation’s own calculations indicated costs approaching £4 trillion, or around
£150,000 per household.
40. The Climate Change Committee now estimates in its Sixth Carbon Budget published
in December 2020 that the annualised resource cost will be less than 1% of GDP per
annum until 2050 but that this would not “necessarily reduce GDP by an equivalent
amount”, as modelling suggested that the level of UK GDP “would be around 2% higher
than it would have been by 2035 as resources are redirected from fossil fuel imports to UK
investment”.58 The Sixth Carbon Budget outlines three possible scenarios which reflect
uncertainties over “how far people will change their behaviours, how quickly technology
will develop and the balance between options where credible alternatives exist”.59
41. The Treasury recognised the uncertainty of cost estimates in its Net Zero Review
interim report, published in December 2020:
… [the] amount of investment required to reach net zero and the
consequential impacts on operating costs are difficult to estimate. They
are affected by a range of factors, including the precise path of transition,
changes in behaviour and the rate at which technology costs fall and
efficiency gains made, all of which are subject to significant uncertainty.60
42. We received evidence on the difficulties of economic modelling and of estimating
the costs. When asked whether the Treasury’s economic modelling facilitates the effective
funding of environmental policies, Chris Stark, Chief Executive of the Committee on
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60

Q6
Q8
Q8
Global Warming Policy Foundation (DEC0009) pp 1–2
Global Warming Policy Foundation (DEC0009) p 2
Climate Change Committee, The Sixth Carbon Budget The UK’s path to Net Zero, (December 2020), p 21
Climate Change Committee, The Sixth Carbon Budget The UK’s path to Net Zero, (December 2020), p 24
HM Treasury, Net Zero Review interim report, December 2020, p 4

16

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Climate Change, told the previous Committee that “the Treasury has several ways of
modelling the economy. Some of those models are extremely appropriate and some are
not.” He noted that the Treasury had considered net zero in recent years as a “spending
pressure”; but in his view, this was not the most appropriate way to look at the issue, as
the policies needed to get the UK to net zero were likely to be long-term. He argued that
“if you view the policies that are necessary to get us to net zero in three or four-yearly
periods as spending pressures, it is going to be extremely difficult to consistently make the
arguments for those policies to be in place”.61 He said that the Treasury needed “to lift its
horizons slightly”.62
43. Professor Nick Robins, Professor in Practice of Sustainable Finance at the London
School of Economics, was critical of current modelling of both costs and benefits, and told
the previous Committee:
[…] the current economic models, potentially including the Treasury’s,
really underestimate the scale of the challenge around climate change in
two profound ways. First, they underestimate the costs, because often they
only price things that are measurable and we know that many of these
things are hard to measure. Secondly, they have consistently underestimated
the benefits of an innovation-led process of growth. […] that leads to
unnecessary caution, both in viewing the challenge of climate change as
smaller than it is and in downsizing the potential opportunity for the wider
economy.63
44. We raised uncertainties about costs with Ministers. The Exchequer Secretary for the
Treasury, Kemi Badenoch MP, recognised the inherent tension between achieving the
UK’s net zero goal by 2050, and ensuring that it was achieved in a cost-effective way,
saying that “the Government’s priority is that we do this in a way that is sustainable and
not in a way that loses people their jobs or their livelihoods”.64 She also told us that the
Treasury was still assessing where the costs for achieving net zero would lie, but she did
say that “between businesses, taxpayers, and consumers, it is about making sure that the
balance is fair”.65 When asked about the costs of not taking action, Ms Badenoch told us
that while she recognised that the physical impact of climate change required action, “we
have not got to a point where we have been putting a figure on it. That is something that
we will be looking to do very soon in the future”.66
45. While Ms Badenoch committed to providing the methodology around the calculation
of cost estimates of the transition to net zero, she noted that “I am not sure whether that
is something that would be in the review itself. It would be quite difficult. I think we can
provide in other forums ways of explaining the methodology”.67 However, Ms Badenoch
committed to going “as far as we possibly can to show the working and be as transparent
as we possibly can”,68 acknowledging that the “consequences could be catastrophic if we
do not accurately estimate what the costs are going to be”.69
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

Oral evidence taken on 2 July 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q12 [Mr Chris Stark]
Oral evidence taken on 2 July 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q12, [Mr Chris Stark]
Oral evidence taken on 2 July 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q12, [Professor Nick Robins]
Q247
Q248
Q254
Q266
Q266
Q267

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

17

46. The Chancellor should publish the Net Zero Strategy as soon as possible and should
set out, in conjunction with the Net Zero Review final report, the principles upon which
the UK will fund its transition to net zero carbon emissions by 2050.
47. There are a number of different estimates of the cost of achieving net zero by
2050. However, the Government has not yet committed to its own cost estimates and
should set these out as soon as possible. The Government should include in the Net Zero
Review final report its own methodology on costs; and it should set out clearly where the
uncertainties lie. The Treasury should also include a range of scenarios on how net zero
might be achieved, and the associated cost for each scenario.

Regional impact of transition to net zero on high carbon industries
48. The 2015 Paris Agreement, to which the UK is a signatory, states that signatories
would “tak[e] into account the imperatives of a just transition of the workforce and the
creation of decent work and quality jobs in accordance with nationally defined development
priorities”.70 This was followed at COP24 in 2018, when the then Prime Minister signed
the Solidarity and Just Transition Declaration Silesia, which reaffirmed the “imperatives
of a just transition of the workforce and the creation of decent work and quality jobs” and
recognised that “the circumstances of economic sectors, cities and regions that are most
likely to be affected by the transition vary from country to country”.71
49. The Government’s Net Zero Review interim report, published in December 2020,
recognised the likely differing regional impact of a transition, observing that it would
“lead to significant changes in the structure of the economy” and that these changes
would “have knock-on impacts on sectors, jobs and regions.”72 It acknowledged that
“employment losses concentrated in high carbon sectors are possible if these sectors
cannot adapt or absorb the costs of decarbonisation”.73
50. Some of our witnesses expanded on this point. Professor Robins, Professor in Practice
of Sustainable Finance, Grantham Research Institute at the London School of Economics,
told us that:
Just transition is already part of the Paris agreement. We can translate that
commitment in a policy sense, for example, when we come forward with
the national infrastructure strategy, when we think about the skills and
retraining that is going to be required. In terms of the regional dimension,
the transition is not going to happen equally across the country. The country
is very differentiated between rural, post-industrial and urban.74
51. Dr Daniel Klier, Group Head of Sustainable Finance at HSBC, observed that financial
institutions were now running scenarios on their lending exposures to identify which
geographies and sectors were most affected. Dr Klier said that “We need to do the same
for the UK economy, to identify exactly what we mean, which industries and which parts
of the economy are affected, and then launch a cluster strategy for those. Investors, banks
and the wider community here will be able to act only if we point fingers at where we have
concerns”.75
70
71
72
73
74
75

United Nations, Paris Agreement, (December 2015), p 2
COP 24 Katowice 2018, Solidarity and Just Transition Silesia Declaration, 2018
HM Treasury, Net Zero Review interim report, December 2020, para 2.27
HM Treasury, Net Zero Review interim report, December 2020, para 2.30
Q95
Q95

18

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

52. For the Government’s part, Niva Thiruchelvam, Deputy Director, Head of Net Zero
Review at the Enterprise and Growth Unit in HM Treasury, told us that “The Net Zero
Review is looking specifically at climate change mitigation and the optimal path to get
to net zero by 2050. As part of that, we are looking at distributional issues [...], and a just
transition is very much part and parcel of that”.76
53. The Treasury’s Net Zero Review final report should include clear sectoral pathways
towards decarbonisation and should address the key policy decisions as to the future of
high carbon industries. Particular attention should be given to the potential regional
impact of those decisions, and the Government should set out a framework and strategy
for supporting those communities which will be most impacted by these changes. This is
especially important given the Government’s commitment to a Just Transition as part
of the Paris Agreement.

76

Q312

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

19

2 Green finance to support
decarbonisation
The importance of utilising private finance
54. The Government’s Green Finance Strategy, published in 2019, was clear that private
finance would have an important role to play in achieving the decarbonisation of the UK
by 2050.77 It noted that:
A strategy to green the financial system as a whole needs to be combined
with specific actions to mobilise and accelerate flows of private finance into
key clean growth and environmental sectors at home and abroad.78
The 2021 Budget reinforced that view, noting that the Government expects the private
sector to provide the majority of investment needed to achieve net zero.79
55. The Government has acknowledged that the transition to net zero will require
significant private finance. Witnesses endorsed this view,80 and we heard that the industry
should be able to provide that finance.81 This Report now considers what will be needed to
ensure that provision is as smooth and effective as possible, including:
•

Long term policy certainty for investors;

•

Greening central banking;

•

Facilitating private investment through: green sovereign bonds; long term asset
funds; proposed reforms to Solvency II; and the new UK infrastructure bank.

Long term policy certainty for investors
56. It has been suggested that in the past, Government policies have changed frequently,
deterring low-carbon investment. Nick Mohlo, Executive Director of Aldersgate Group,
a membership organisation promoting a competitive and environmentally sustainable
economy, told us that:
If you go back to some of the policy developments between 2010 and 2016,
we saw a fairly high level of uncertainty across low-carbon investments. The
levy control framework, which was the overall pot of funding allocated to
renewable energy funding, was delayed on multiple occasions. The fourth
carbon budget had been reviewed quite prematurely. The zero-carbonhomes requirement was cancelled in 2015, and that had very negative knockon impacts on the feeling of investment confidence, but also on the work
of other Government Departments that had put a considerable amount of
time into developing those policies in co-ordination with business.82
77
78
79
80
81
82

HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, pp 2, 9
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 9
HM Treasury, Build Back Better: our plan for growth, CP 401, March 2021, p 91
Oral evidence taken on 2 July 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q14, [Sagarika Chatterjee] ; Q101
Q101 [Dr Daniel Klier], Q85 [Chris Cummings]
Q4

20

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Mr Mohlo added that more of the off-shore wind infrastructure supply chain could
have been based in Britain had it not been for that uncertainty. He told us that “a lot
of the investment uncertainty of the time definitely had some negative impact on their
perception of the UK as an investable market and it resulted in a smaller number of supply
chain investments than we would otherwise have seen.”83
57. Chris Cummings, Chief Executive Officer of the Investment Association, also
emphasised the importance of policy certainty to attract investment, adding:
As the investment management industry, the one thing we love to invest in
is infrastructure: long-term projects with known investment horizons. It
is exactly the type of thing we get excited about. Successive Governments,
unfortunately, have changed the policy direction, rules, incentives and
so on, which makes it much harder for UK pension funds to invest in
infrastructure.84
Mr Cummings further noted that “Policy certainty underpins all of this, making sure that
Government are thinking long term, especially when thinking about green infrastructure
and green investment.”85
58. The Government announced in Budget 2021 that the Treasury’s Net Zero Review is
looking at how the UK Government can reduce policy uncertainty in order to encourage
investment, alongside innovation and technological development.86
59. The Government has recognised that private finance will need to play a key part in
funding the transition to net zero. If it is to do so, the Government will need to provide
long-term certainty in climate-related policy and must ensure that consistent policy
signals are sent to investors. We are encouraged that the Government acknowledged
these needs in the 2021 Budget.

Green gilts
60. At the November 2020 Spending Review, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced
that the UK would issue its first green sovereign bond or ‘green gilt’.87 Green sovereign
bonds can be defined as debt securities issued by governments where the proceeds raised
are used to finance clearly defined projects which have environmental benefits.88 Following
this commitment, the Treasury noted at Budget 2021 that:
The government will issue its first sovereign green bond—or green gilt—
this summer, with a further issuance to follow later in 2021 as the UK looks
to build out a ‘green curve’. Green gilt issuance for the financial year will
total a minimum of £15 billion. The green gilt framework, to be published
in June, will detail the types of expenditures that will be financed to help
meet the government’s green objectives. The government also commits to
reporting the contributions of green gilt spending towards social benefits
such as job creation and levelling up.89
83
84
85
86
87
88
89

Q4
Q79
Q108
HM Treasury, Build Back Better: our plan for growth, CP 401, March 2021, p 91
HM Treasury, “Chancellor sets out ambition for future of financial services”, accessed 12 February 2021
BMO Global Asset Management, Should the UK Debt Management Office issue green gilts? (August 2020), p 1
HM Treasury, Budget 2021, HC 1266, March 2021, Para 2.144, p 63

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

21

61. Despite the Government’s announcements on green gilts, in comparison to other
European governments, the UK is lagging behind. Germany raised 6.5 billion euros from
its first green sovereign bond in September 2020,90 while France issued its first green
sovereign bond in January 2017 raising 7 billion euros. France’s green sovereign bonds are
used to fund the government’s ‘Invest for the Future’ programme to “fight climate change,
adapt to climate change, protect biodiversity and fight pollution”.91
62. This delay in the issuance of a green gilt may have come at a cost in developing other
green bond issuance markets in the UK. Dr Daniel Klier, Group Head of Sustainable
Finance at HSBC, highlighted that there was not yet a strongly growing sterling green
bond market, as there is in dollars and euros, and noted that a benchmark bond issued by
the Government was likely to be needed to unlock the sterling market.92
63. While we heard evidence from finance industry experts, including Chris Cummings,
Chief Executive Officer of the Investment Association, that there would be investor
appetite for a UK green gilt issuance,93 the Debt Management Office has also previously
suggested to us that green gilts may mean raising finance at a premium compared with
conventional gilts.94
64. However, some of our witnesses disagreed with this analysis. Professor Nick Robins,
Professor in Practice for Sustainable Finance, Grantham Research Institute at the London
School of Economics, told us that “it would be very plausible to issue something that could
raise money at lower cost for the state”.95 Chris Cummings added that “having spoken to
our members, I am not convinced that there would be a premium for these investments”.96
Dr Klier agreed, telling us that “at the moment, especially in Germany, we come in at
prices that are below the market curve. I do not see any evidence for why we should be at
a premium”.97
65. While John Glen MP, Economic Secretary to the Treasury, confirmed that there had
previously been value for money considerations around sovereign green bonds, he noted
that “market conditions have materially changed, […] and that is why we announced it.”98
66. We welcome the announcement in the 2021 Budget of a timetable for the issuance
of the UK’s first green sovereign bond or ‘green gilt’. However, the UK is lagging behind
other countries in the issuance of these green bonds. This runs the risk of holding back
the development of a private sterling green bond market. Although concerns about the
potential for green bonds to be a more expensive form of debt for the Government seem
to have dissipated to a degree, the Government should none the less set out its tolerance,
when issuing such bonds, for them to be more expensive than other forms of Government
debt.

90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98

“Germany raises 6.5 billion euros from first ever green bond”, Reuters, 2 September 2020
Agence France Trésor, ‘Green OATs’, accessed 12 February 2021
Q109
Q65 [Chris Cummings], also Q109
Oral Evidence taken on 24 June 2020 HC (2019–21) 496, Q55–58 [Alison Thewliss, Sir Robert Stheeman]
Q95
Q109
Q109
Q243

22

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Greening central banking
67. As part of its monetary policy operations, the Bank of England operates a Corporate
Bond Purchase Scheme (CBPS). The Bank describes the CBPS as follows:
The Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme (CBPS or “the Scheme”) was launched
in August 2016. It imparts monetary stimulus by lowering the yields on
corporate bonds, thereby reducing the cost of borrowing for companies. It
does this by triggering portfolio rebalancing into riskier assets by sellers of
assets, and by stimulating new issuance of corporate bonds.99
The Asset Purchase Facility (APF) currently holds £20 billion of corporate bonds under
the CBPS. This represents a small fraction of the total holdings of the APF, which is
currently planned to reach £895 billion, and the total market of corporate bonds eligible
for the Scheme, which amounts to £160 billion.100
68. These corporate bond purchases by the Bank may be being used to fund carbonintensive activity. This can be seen in the Bank’s own published Taskforce on Climaterelated Financial Disclosures (TCFD)-compliant disclosures.101 In his foreword to those
disclosures, the Governor of the Bank of England noted that:
…the carbon intensity of our holdings of UK sterling corporate bonds (2%
of the portfolio) reflects the position of the UK market generally. However,
there remains a gap between the associated carbon outputs of these holdings
and the Paris goals. This demonstrates the additional work needed to meet
the UK’s goal of net-zero emissions by 2050.102
69. Positive Money, a campaign group seeking to “make money and banking work for
society”,103 noted what the impact of these holdings meant for the net zero target:
‘Greening’ the Bank of England remains a key step in facilitating the
transition to a Net Zero economy by ensuring financial flows are aligned
with the government’s climate targets. As Britain’s central bank, the Bank
of England is currently overseeing a financial system which is significantly
out of step with the UK’s legally binding commitments under the Paris
Agreement. As former Bank of England governor Mark Carney told the
Treasury Committee in October 2019, the global financial system may be
funding temperature rises of more than 4C, more than double the 1.5C
aimed for in the Paris Agreement. Indeed, the Bank of England’s own asset
purchases are currently aligned with a 3.5C increase in temperatures by
the end of the century, which the Bank has defended as simply mirroring
the market, which the MSCI Reference Portfolio suggests is funding 3.7C
warming.104
99
100

101
102
103
104

Bank of England, ‘Asset Purchase Facility (APF): Additional Corporate Bond Purchases - Market Notice 2 April
2020’, accessed 9 April 2021
Bank of England, Bonds eligible for the Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme as at 3 September 2020’ (September
2020); Bank of England, Monetary Policy Summary and Minutes of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting
ending on 17 March 2021 (March 2021), p 1
Bank of England, The Bank of England’s climate related financial disclosure 2020, (June 2020)
Bank of England, The Bank of England’s climate related financial disclosure 2020, (June 2020), p 1
Positive Money, ‘Making money and banking work for society (positivemoney.org)’, accessed 17 March 2021
Positive Money (DEC0060) para 3.1

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

23

70. In his appointment hearing in March 2020 with us for the role of Governor of the
Bank of England, we asked Andrew Bailey about excluding fossil fuels from future bonds
purchases. He told us:
The original policy with the corporate bond programme was to hold
essentially a portfolio that mimicked the corporate bond markets—in
other words, it was a neutral portfolio. That was done deliberately. The
Bank of England is not in there, picking companies; it is completely neutral.
Whatever the market is, we hold the neutral portfolio. The question you
rightly raise is whether we should shift that to say, “Given the public interest
in climate change, we should shift the make-up of the portfolio to being one
that is on the way to net neutral,” or however you want to define it. I think
there is a very strong argument for doing that.105
71. Sarah Breedon, Executive Director for UK Deposit Takers Supervision at the Bank
of England and its executive sponsor for work on climate change, emphasised this point.
She told us that “what we have said we will do—and we will do—is think about how
best to attach conditionality, working with Treasury, which needs to agree it, given that it
decides our remit, for the corporate bonds we purchase as part of our quantitative easing
approach.”106
72. At Budget 2021, the Chancellor provided the Monetary Policy Committee of the
Bank of England with a new remit letter, in which he amended its remit to reflect the
importance of environmental sustainability and the transition to net zero: “I am today
updating the MPC’s remit to reflect the government’s economic strategy for achieving
strong, sustainable and balanced growth that is also environmentally sustainable and
consistent with the transition to a net zero economy.”107 In response to this new remit
letter, the Bank made the following announcement:
In the coming months we will provide more information about our proposed
approach to adjusting the Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme (CBPS) to
account for the climate impact of the issuers of the bonds we hold, with a
view to adapting our approach by the time of our next scheduled round of
reinvestment operations in 2021 Q4.108
73. There has been criticism of this change of remit. Lord King, a former Governor of the
Bank of England, told the House of Lords on 12 March 2021 that:
When asset purchases commenced in 2009, the framework was established
to ensure that the Bank did not become the arbiter of credit allocation
among different sectors and different companies. But the new remit requires
the bank to do just that, and to “reflect the importance of environmental
sustainability and the transition to net zero”109 in its purchases of corporate
bonds. Some may argue that this is a harmless gesture; after all, given
the inflation outlook, it is far from obvious that there will be new asset
purchases by the Bank. But what seems a harmless gesture today may prove
105
106
107
108
109

Oral evidence taken on 4 March 2020, HC (2019–21) 122, Q63 [Julie Marson, Andrew Bailey]
Q117
HM Treasury, Remit for the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), March 2021, p 1
Bank of England, ‘MPC Remit statement and letter and FPC Remit letter, accessed 12 March 2021
HC Deb, 3 March 2021, col 259 [Commons Chamber]

24

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

damaging tomorrow. I know that climate change arouses passions, but
that is no reason to embroil the Bank of England in what should be the
responsibility of government. Climate change and declining biodiversity are
serious issues that merit proper debate. Fiddling with the Bank of England’s
remit, while at the same time taking no action on a carbon tax and freezing
fuel duty again, are gestures, not a coherent policy. More importantly, they
are the first steps on a slippery slope to undermining the independence of
the Bank, and we cannot afford to lose that.110
74. We note the new remit provided to the Monetary Policy Committee, which will
allow it to rebalance its Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme to take account of the
climate impact of the bonds it holds. We will continue to scrutinise this process and
will examine how any changes are enacted, and how those changes impact on the other
policy objectives and the independence of the Monetary Policy Committee.

Long-term Asset Fund
75. We heard a proposal for reform to facilitate green finance from Chris Cummings,
CEO of the Investment Association, who told us that his major recommendation for
regulatory change was to create a new ‘long-term asset fund’:
This is a new fund vehicle that we have been spending a lot of time talking to
our friends at the Treasury and the FCA about, which allows retail investors
and particularly DC pension funds to invest in infrastructure. […] It is a
new fund structure, which is specifically designed to address the long-term
investment issues.111
76. Sheldon Mills, then Interim Executive Director for Strategy and Competition at the
Financial Conduct Authority, told us that:
We are working closely with the Investment Association in relation to
long-term asset funds and trying to ensure that we have the right balance
of enabling that innovation in the market, getting coalition from asset
managers and others around this new type of vehicle and having the right
level of consumer protection and risk in relation to that, so that we have
the right badges on it and, when those funds are potentially distributed,
the right types of investors can come into them. I am not saying that they
are made to be risky, but they are a different type of investment than retail
investors might be used to. We are working very closely with the Investment
Association, and we hope to finalise that as quickly as we can.112
77. In November 2020, the Chancellor announced the launch of a new type of ‘long-term
asset fund’ which would allow pension savers to invest in infrastructure assets.113 In the
same month, the Treasury, the Bank of England and the FCA convened a working group
to facilitate investment in productive finance. The minutes of The Productive Finance
Working Group Steering Committee note that:
110
111
112
113

HL Deb, 12 March 2021, col 1914 [Lords Chamber]
Q77
Q175
HM Treasury, “Chancellor sets out ambition for future of financial services”, accessed 19 February 2021

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

25

The Working Group should draw on a large amount of existing work on the
barriers to investment in productive finance. Its focus should be to identify
practical ways to address both the operational and demand side barriers,
and set out a clear roadmap for their implementation. This would support
the Chancellor’s public commitment to set up a Long-Term Asset Fund
(LTAF) later this year.
The minutes also note that “a successful outcome for the Working Group would be to have
facilitated the launch of at least one LTAF, with capital having been committed from a
broad range of investors”.114
78. While in his proposal, Mr Cummings argued that such a long-term asset fund might
be available to retail investors, this has been subject to debate at the Productive Finance
Working Group Steering Committee. The January 2021 minutes note that:
The Steering Committee discussed the intended target market for the LTAF
[Long Term Asset Fund]. This will be an important question for the TEG
[Technical Expert Group] to explore ahead of future Steering Committee
meetings. Some members, whilst recognising that the LTAF was unlikely
to be a product for the mass retail market, nonetheless, wanted an LTAF
to be available to sophisticated segments of the retail market, as well as
institutional investors. Others commented that, as this was a new product
which would be investing in asset classes not traditionally available to retail
investors in an open-ended structure, and which might require notice
periods exceeding a year, it would not be suitable for most retail investors.
Careful consideration, along with input from the advisory community,
would be required about how it conforms to tax wrappers (for example,
ISAs, SIPPs). One member noted that listings on exchanges can help provide
access to retail investors.
Given the challenges of distributing a new product to the retail market,
some members thought the initial focus should be on delivering an LTAF
for institutional investors (most notably large DC pension schemes), before
facilitating access to retail investors at a later stage.115
79. When the Chancellor announced in November 2020 that this new type of ‘longterm asset fund’ would launch, he explained that it would do so within a year. However,
the Investment Association recently announced that a regulatory consultation from the
Financial Conduct Authority was required before any new fund could launch.116
80. We note the debate at the Productive Finance Working Group Steering Committee
on retail access to the ‘long term asset fund’ (LTAF). There should be clarity about who
will have access to the LTAF. The Chancellor and the financial regulators should set out
the timeframe for the launch of the announced ‘long term asset fund’ to allow pension
savers to invest in long-term projects. We would expect that such an LTAF would be
focused on providing a net-zero compliant product.
114
115
116

Bank of England, The Productive Finance Working Group, Minutes of the first Steering Committee meeting,
(Tuesday 26 January 2021), paras 3 - 4
Bank of England, The Productive Finance Working Group, Minutes of the first Steering Committee meeting,
(Tuesday 26 January 2021), paras 20–21
Pinsent Masons, ‘Details of Long Term Asset Fund Revealed’, accessed 19 February 2021

26

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Solvency II
81. We heard evidence that regulatory restrictions under Solvency II were preventing
insurance companies from investing in long-term infrastructure assets. Solvency II is
the European Directive on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of Insurance and
Reinsurance, which came into force on 1 January 2016.117 The Bank of England describes
Solvency II as setting out the “regulatory requirements for insurance firms and groups,
covering financial resources, governance and accountability, risk assessment and
management, supervision, reporting and public disclosure”.118
82. Huw Evans, Chief Executive Officer of the Association of British Insurers, told us
that:
We have to support the Government and lobby them to change the Solvency
II framework so that insurers are in a position to invest in a much wider
range of sustainable ESG assets that fully meet the task of policyholder
protection and of delivering sustainable returns over the long run, but
that enable insurers to put their £2 trillion-worth of assets to much more
sustainable and good use going forward.”119
This point was also emphasised by Aviva in its evidence to the previous Committee, where
it argued that:
Regulators should work to ensure that capital requirements reflect true longterm sustainability risks, and do not disincentivise long term sustainable
investment. For example, Solvency II should be reformed so that it no longer
discourages insurers from investing in green infrastructure.120
83. In October 2020, the Government announced a review of Solvency II and published
a call for evidence.121 In his foreword to that call for evidence, the Economic Secretary
noted that “The review will be guided by our objectives: to ensure a vibrant and prosperous
insurance sector, to provide long-term capital to support growth, and to uphold high
standards of policyholder protection and promote the safety and soundness of firms.”122
84. The Treasury should, as part of its review of Solvency II, consider reforms that
could improve the funding of sustainable green infrastructure while maintaining the
financial stability of insurers.

National Infrastructure Bank
85. On 25 November 2020, as part of the launch of the UK’s new National Infrastructure
Strategy, the Chancellor of the Exchequer (the Rt Hon Rishi Sunak MP) announced a
new UK Infrastructure Bank which will draw private finance investment into new
infrastructure projects.123 The National Infrastructure Strategy described what the Bank
117
118
119
120
121
122
123

Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the taking-up and pursuit of the business of
Insurance and Reinsurance (Solvency II), 09/138/EC
Bank of England, ‘Solvency II’, accessed 11 March 2021
Q187
Aviva Plc (DUE0048) para 3
HM Treasury, Review of Solvency II: Call for Evidence, October 2020
HM Treasury, Review of Solvency II: Call for Evidence, October 2020, p 1
HM Treasury, National Infrastructure Strategy, CP 329, November 2020, p 7

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

27

would do:
•

Support the Government’s commitment to ‘levelling up’ and net zero;

•

Lend to local and mayoral authorities for key infrastructure projects; and

•

Provide advice on financing infrastructure, alongside offering debt, equity and
hybrid products.124

86. Prior to this announcement, some witnesses to our inquiry had broadly supported
a state-owned national investment or infrastructure bank.125 However, Professor Nick
Robins, Professor in Practice of Sustainable Finance, Grantham Research Institute at the
London School of Economics, reflected on the Green Investment Bank, the Government’s
state-owned investment bank which invested in offshore wind, waste and biomass, energy
efficiency and small scale renewables from 2012 until its sale in 2017.126 Mr Robins said
that
The Green Investment Bank was neither one thing nor the other. It was
neither a classic, long term public infrastructure bank, like KFW in
Germany or the European Investment Bank, and it was not a fully profitmaking private sector investor […].127
He noted that there would not be a role for “a niche green investment bank, but for
what is called a policy bank, a national investment bank to support development of the
Government’s economic policy”.128
87. The National Audit Office found in 2017 that the Green Investment Bank had
invested in 100 projects, committing £3.4 billion of its own capital, and “had attracted
£8.6 billion of private capital, equating to around £2.50 for every £1 invested”.129 While
the Green Investment Bank attracted investment into the green economy, particularly
into off-shore wind, its impact in other sectors was less certain. The National Audit Office
recommended that when setting up companies the Government should set out criteria for
judging success and develop a framework for evaluating performance, and should ensure
that the company’s capital structure aligns with its objectives, and that there are clear
arrangements for ongoing financing.130
88. Regarding the sale of the previous Green Investment Bank, Sir Amyas Morse, the
former Comptroller and Auditor General said:
Ultimately the value for money of the Green Investment Bank intervention
will only be seen over time. A key test will be whether the Government
needs to intervene again in this way to stimulate growth in the green
economy and to help it achieve its climate change commitments.131
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131

HM Treasury, National Infrastructure Strategy, CP 329, November 2020, p 70
Q65 [Professor Nick Robins], Q74, Q211, Qq220–221 [Sandra Boss, Huw Evans]
Green Finance Institute, The Role of a UK National Infrastructure Bank in a Green Recovery Insights paper,
(December 2020), p 3
Q74
Q74
Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General, National Audit Office, The Green Investment Bank, HC (2017–
19) 619, para. 8
Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General, National Audit Office, The Green Investment Bank, HC (2017–
19) 619, para. 20
Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General, National Audit Office, The Green Investment Bank, HC (2017–
19) 619, para. 19

28

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Only three years on from the sale of the GIB, the Government has decided it does again
need to intervene in order to stimulate growth.
89. At Budget 2021, the Chancellor provided more detail on how the UK Infrastructure
Bank would operate. He said that it:
will have £22 billion of financial capacity to deliver on its objectives,
consisting of £12 billion of equity and debt capital and the ability to issue
£10 billion of guarantees. It will draw capital from HM Treasury and be able
to borrow from private markets. It will also grow through recycling and
retention of return on investments. The government will allocate capital to
the Bank in phases in line with its institutional development.132
90. However, the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) noted in its forecast that:
As an EU member state, the UK received almost €120 billion (or £89 billion)
in loans and equity from the EIB between 1973 and 2019. In the five years
prior to the EU referendum in 2016, EIB lending averaged £5 billion a year,
but it fell sharply in 2017 and was less than £1 billion a year in 2018 and
2019. The Government forecasts that the UKIB will lend and invest around
£1½ billion a year (net of lending to local authorities that would otherwise
have taken place through the Public Works Loans Board). This would be
equivalent to around a third of the financing that was provided by the EIB
prior to the EU referendum.133
91. While the Government acknowledged that the EIB had previously provided support
to UK projects, it noted that an assessment from Vivid Economics for the National
Infrastructure Commission134 “showed that a portion of EIB activity crowded out private
investment” and that respondents to the Infrastructure Finance Review echoed this point.
The Government’s view therefore is that “where the EIB provided support in well-financed
areas, the government anticipates that the private sector will step in without public sector
support”.135
92. Witnesses to our post-Budget 2021 evidence session were in agreement that the UK
Infrastructure Bank’s proposed funding position was not big enough. Paul Johnson CBE,
Director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies, told us that “If it is going to be effective, yes,
it will need to be bigger. It is considerably smaller than the European Investment Bank,
in the amount of money that that was making available. If you are serious about this
in the longer run, it is going to have to be a bit bigger.”136 Rain Newton-Smith, Chief
Economist at the Confederation of British Industry, agreed with Mr Johnson: “The initial
pot of capital and equity is small. That will need to be scaled up over time. As you point
out, it is much smaller than the German equivalent”.137
93. Mr Johnson also noted that while there might be a case for starting relatively small,
he emphasised the need to focus on how the money is spent, how the institution is set up,
and to be clear about the purpose of the UK Infrastructure Bank:
132
133
134
135
136
137

HM Treasury, UK Infrastructure Bank – Policy design, March 2021, p 4
Office for Budget Responsibility, Economic and fiscal outlook on Budget 2021, March 2021, Box 3.6
Vivid Economics, The role and impact of the EIB and GIB on UK infrastructure investment (May 2018), p 6
HM Treasury, UK Infrastructure Bank – Policy design, March 2021, para. 1.7
Oral evidence taken on 10 March 2021, HC (2019–21) 1196, Q196 [Dame Angela Eagle, Paul Johnson]
Oral evidence taken on 10 March 2021, HC (2019–21) 1196, Q197 [Dame Angela Eagle, Rain Newton-Smith]

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

29

We need to be quite clear about quite what the purpose of these organisations
is. […] which is really about lowering the risk for the private sector
investment, reducing financing costs, possibly, on the green side, helping to
create new investable asset classes and, in particular, being able sensibly to
invest in early-stage long-horizon projects with high upfront costs and risks,
the sort of things that are particularly important in the green economy.138
94. While the Government announced at the Spending Review in November 2020 that
it intended that the UK Infrastructure Bank should be operational in an interim manner
from spring 2021, and that it would legislate to put the Bank on a statutory footing,139
the Chancellor’s announcement at Budget 2021 suggested that a framework document
providing further details on its operations would be published in the spring ahead of the
UK Infrastructure Bank’s launch.140
95. In the proposed framework for the new UK Infrastructure Bank, the Chancellor
should clarify its governance arrangements, how investment decisions will be made,
and how it will ensure that it attracts sufficient private capital. In particular, it should
clearly set out how the Bank will meet the Government’s commitment to Net Zero. The
Government should also set out how it will incorporate lessons learned from the former
Green Investment Bank, and whether it intends that the UK Infrastructure Bank should
be funded to offer a lending facility at a level similar to that offered by the European
Investment Bank before the UK referendum on membership of the EU.

138
139
140

Oral evidence taken on 10 March 2021, HC (2019–21) 1196, Q196 [Dame Angela Eagle, Paul Johnson]
HM Treasury, National Infrastructure Strategy, CP 329, November 2020, p 70
HM Treasury, UK Infrastructure Bank – Policy design, March 2021, p 3

30

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

3 The role of consumers
The importance of consumer choice
96. Consumer behavioural change, on a voluntary basis, will help to drive the transition to
net zero, requiring both education and engagement. Consumer choice will be particularly
important, so that people can make decisions that best suit their particular situation.
97. Community Energy England—which supports those committed to the community
energy sector—told us that achieving net zero would require consumer ‘buy-in’,
acknowledging that while “investment in Green Infrastructure and technology are vital,
net zero cannot be ‘delivered’, only achieved with the consent and active participation of
the people, not least because the Climate Change Committee estimates that 62% of all
the measures it identifies as essential to achieving net zero are dependent on behaviour
change”.141 In September 2020, the UK Parliament-sponsored Climate Assembly UK,
which brought together people from all walks of life to discuss how the UK should meet
the net zero target, published a report highlighting the importance of consumer choice in
combating climate change, as it allows individuals to choose the best solution for them.142
98. The Treasury has also noted that interventions can make it easier for consumers to
choose low-carbon options. In its Net Zero Review Interim Report, the Treasury states that:
Facilitative levers seek to change the structure of the market or the way
people make decisions in order to make it easier for households and firms
to choose low-carbon options. These levers can complement carbon pricing
by addressing the other market failures that hold back the process of
decarbonisation. This can lower the overall costs of the transition, change
who pays and who is able to cover the necessary costs.143
99. We consider below three elements that may have an impact on consumer choices
around green finance:
•

Consumer inertia or an inability to choose

•

Appropriate transparency and ‘Greenwashing’

•

Innovation

Consumer inertia and a lack of choice
Defined contribution pensions
100. Consumer choice can only work as a lever if consumers utilise the choices available to
them. Yet within pensions, consumers may not have choices, or where they do, they may
not use them. We heard evidence that 96% of pension savers144 in defined contribution145
pension schemes are invested in their pension’s ‘default’ fund.146
141
142
143
144
145

146

Community Energy England (DEC0091) para. 2.5
Climate Assembly UK, The path to Net Zero - Climate Assembly UK Final Report, (September 2020), p.6
HM Treasury, Net Zero Review: Interim report, December 2020, p 49, para 4.15
Q188
Defined contribution pension scheme definition: “Defined contribution pensions build up a pension pot using
your contributions and your employers contributions (if applicable) plus investment returns and tax relief”,
Money Advice Service, accessed 15 February 2021
“A ‘default’ fund is the fund that members see their contributions invested in should they fail to make an
alternative investment choice”, Default fund design in DC, accessed on 15 February 2021

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

31

101. Huw Evans, Chief Executive of the Association of British Insurers, told us that one
of the key challenges in relation to ‘default’ funds was that of low consumer financial
capability and the need for clear explanations about the options available to consumers.147
Mr Evans hoped that part of the solution might come from fintech,148 through the
“development of more consumer-facing apps and opportunities for customers to engage
with how their pension funds are managed”.149
102. Mr Evans, however, also highlighted a potential policy barrier against offering
sustainable funds as a ‘default’ fund option for auto-enrolled pensions:
The charge cap that we currently have in place for auto-enrol pension
schemes is set at 0.75%. Nearly all ESG funds150 are above that because they
involve active management, so they are more expensive to run. As long as
you have a charge cap that does not allow for any exceptions, for example
for ESG, you will find it hard to shift that. I would argue that there is a
strong case in public policy terms for the charge cap having an exemption
if there is an ESG component, to give people who are auto-enrolled in those
funds to have the option to go above it.151
103. However, recent government announcements may mitigate this charge cap restriction
to Environmental, Social, and Governance (‘ESG’) fund take-up in auto-enrolled pensions.
In its Budget document Budget 2021, the Treasury noted that:
The government will consult within the next month on whether certain costs
within the charge cap affect pension schemes’ ability to invest in a broader
range of assets. This is to ensure pension schemes are not discouraged from
such investments and are able to offer the highest possible returns for savers.
DWP will also come forward with draft regulations to make it easier for
schemes to take up such opportunities within the charge cap by smoothing
certain performance fees over a multi-year period.152
104. Anthony Raymond, General Counsel and Director of Legal Services, Policy and
Advisory Directorate at the Pensions Regulator, told us that transparency would be “really
important” in tackling default fund inertia, noting that defined contribution schemes now
had to publish a statement of investment principles. Mr Raymond considered though that
in the case of a default fund in an occupational pension scheme153 “to effect real change
in this space, it is about ensuring that the trustee is doing the right things and considering
the right issues”.154 Sheldon Mills, then Interim Executive Director of Strategy and
Competition at the Financial Conduct Authority, took a similar view:
147
148

149
150

151
152
153

154

Q188
“Fintech” or Financial Technology is defined by the Bank of England as “technology-enabled financial
innovation, which is changing the way financial institutions provide - and consumers and businesses use financial services”.
Q190
Environmental, Social and Governance (‘ESG’) funds are defined by Robeco as: “portfolios of equities and/
or bonds for which environmental, social and governance factors have been integrated into the investment
process”, accessed 15 February 2021
Q190
HM Treasury, Budget 2021, HC 1266, March 2021, para 2.147, p 64
Occupational pension scheme definition: “Workplace pension schemes or workplace pensions are pension
schemes that are set up by employers to provide their employees with retirement benefits”, Pensions Advisory
Service, accessed 15 February 2021
Q126

32

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

… what we need to think about, […] is whether the right mechanisms are in
place so that that demand filters through into the choice sets that people have
in things like pensions, and whether the right products are available […]
that can go into default funds, so that either the mechanism demonstrates
through transparency to pension holders that there is something there for
them, or you can have greater choice at the point of entry. We need to think
more closely about that with trustees.155
105. Mr Mills also explained that the Financial Conduct Authority had already taken
some action in requesting Independent Governance Committees156 for workplace
personal pensions schemes to ensure that Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG)
considerations were included in their assessment of investment mandates.157 However, Mr
Mills acknowledged that with the increasing demand for ESG-related investments, “there
must be more that we can now start to do to match this increasing demand, but also filter
into the overall challenge of net zero”.158
106. When asked about the high proportion of consumers in default funds, the Economic
Secretary to the Treasury told us that:
… The pensions world is changing rapidly, and the Pensions Bill going
through Parliament is going to make some progress, but the real challenge
for the immediate term is to define what that green investment is and
progress that at a wholesale and at a retail level, so that we can get more
clarity on that. We will then make progress as the opportunities to invest
a higher proportion in sustainable investments become clearer and more
apparent.159
107. In a follow-up letter in December 2020, the Economic Secretary noted the interventions
the Government had made in this area, and he told us that “whilst we welcome pension
saver engagement and consumer choice, it should never be necessary to switch out of the
default to invest sustainably”. However, he did not advocate mandatory targets, telling us
that:
Mandatory climate targets would mean that pension scheme governance
bodies would be in a position where they are forced to choose between
making the right investment decision for their members and breaching
legislation. The easiest way to protect themselves in this situation—and,
under threat of penalty, the most likely action—is divestment. However,
uncoordinated divestment will not help us reach our net zero goal, as the
stock could be bought up by other investors and emissions will not be
curbed. Pension scheme trustees and savers will remain exposed to the
consequences of those high emissions whilst having less ability to hold the
emitters to account.
155
156

157
158
159

Q126
Independent Governance Committee definition: Financial Conduct Authority rules “require that firms that
operate workplace personal pensions schemes to establish and maintain Independent Governance Committees
(IGCs). IGCs have a duty to scrutinise the value for money of the provider’s workplace personal pension schemes,
taking into account transaction costs, raising concerns and making recommendations to the provider’s board
as appropriate. IGCs must act solely in the interests of relevant scheme members; act independently of the
provider.”, Financial Conduct Authority, accessed 15 February 2021
Q126
Q126
Q306

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

33

Rather, the Government supports a whole economy transition, where duties
land equally on all participants in the investment chain. Pension schemes
and pension savers—many on low to moderate incomes—should not be
singled out for blunt targets in an ineffective effort to fund the transition.
This is a much less equitable outcome than the use of disclosure, regulation,
and public investment which Government is already committed to.160
108. There is a high level of inertia amongst consumers around defined contribution
pension fund choice, with most remaining in the ‘default’ fund. The Treasury has been
robust in its view that default funds should not be required to move to more green
alternatives, but at the same time maintains that consumers should not have to switch out
of the default fund to invest sustainably. The Government should resolve this apparent
contradiction. At present the Treasury is relying on a blend of disclosure, regulation and
public investment to foster a transition towards more sustainable investment. For now,
we support that approach, but the Treasury should report regularly on the proportion
of pension holders in defined contribution pension schemes who remain in the default
fund, and the extent to which those default funds are aligned with a path to Net Zero.
Requirements on workplace pension scheme trustees
109. Consumers with Defined Benefit pensions are unable to choose how their assets are
invested, creating an absence of consumer choice as a driver of change. They are therefore
reliant on the pension scheme trustees to consider material climate-related financial risks,
and to invest sustainably.
110. The Pension Schemes Act 2021161 (‘the Act’) is intended to support the Government’s
expectation, set out in the Green Finance Strategy, that all large asset owners will make
disclosures in line with the recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures (TCFD) by 2022.162 Section 124 of the Act amends the Pensions
Act 1995 so as to provide for regulations which “may impose requirements on the trustees
or managers of an occupational pension scheme of a prescribed description with a view
to securing that there is effective governance of the scheme with respect to the effects of
climate change”.163
111. In September 2020, Anthony Raymond, General Counsel and Director of Legal
Services, Policy and Advisory Directorate at the Pensions Regulator, told us that the Act
would make a real difference, as the TCFD requirements would be put on a statutory
footing. He noted that the Act would also include regulation-making powers which would
be an area of focus for the regulator.164
112. We note that the UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association (UKSIF) found
large-scale non-compliance among trustees with the previous regulatory expectations
on Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) considerations set by the Pensions
Regulator.165 Although Mr Raymond told us that of the schemes reviewed by UKSIF “only
160
161
162
163
164
165

HM Treasury, Letter to the Chair of the Treasury Committee from the Economic Secretary, Decarbonisation of
the UK economy and green finance inquiry, 16 December 2020, paras 11 - 13
Pension Schemes Act 2021 received Royal Assent on 11 February 2021
Explanatory Notes to the Pension Schemes Bill [HL], 16 July 2020 [Bill 165 (2020)-EN], para 29
Pension Schemes Act 2021, Section 124(2)
Q118
Q134; UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association, ‘Changing course: how pension trustees are
responding to climate change and ESG’, accessed 15 February 2021

34

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

nine of the 45 schemes were within the purview of the legislation at that point”,166 he
acknowledged that the Pensions Regulator needed to be clear with the industry and engage
with them. However, Mr Raymond also noted that supervisors had been trained on “the
sorts of things they need to be looking out for when they are engaging with schemes, and
where necessary, enforcement”.167
113. Mr Raymond explained that although the governance of larger pension schemes
tended to be better, and were better equipped to deal with ESG issues, “we have systemic
issues across the pensions landscape in terms of large numbers of small DC [Defined
Contribution] schemes […] over 30,000, with 6,000 or so DB [Defined Benefit] schemes”.168
114. The Department of Work and Pensions first consulted on ‘Taking action on climate
risk: improving governance: improving governance and reporting by occupational
pension schemes’ in August 2020.169 In its follow-on consultation in early 2021, on the new
regulations to be made under the Pension Schemes Act 2021, the Government confirmed
that primarily larger pension schemes would initially be subject to mandatory climate
change governance and TCFD reporting requirements:
(a) trust schemes with £1 billion or more in relevant assets
(b) authorised master trusts; and
(c) authorised schemes providing collective money purchase benefits.170
115. The Government acknowledges that industry responses to the first consultation most
commonly “suggested that the asset threshold should move down rapidly to below £1bn”
and that a significant number of respondents suggested that “smaller schemes might be
encouraged to implement the climate governance requirements voluntarily in the first
instance, or perhaps on a comply or explain basis.”171
116. The Government has confirmed that it will consult again in 2024 before deciding
whether to extend the regulations to pension schemes with less than £1 billion in assets.172
However, in the interim this will leave smaller pension schemes outside the scope of the
regulations and these pension savers outside the trustee obligations envisaged by the
Pension Schemes Act 2021.
117. Consumers who hold defined benefits pensions have no choice as to how their
assets are allocated. They rely upon their trustees. We note that previous attempts to
get defined benefit schemes to acknowledge Environmental Social and Governance
concerns have not been entirely successful. In its phased approach to implementing
the regulations, the Pensions Regulator will need to consider how to reach smaller
pension schemes. The draft regulations appear to exclude the smallest trust schemes.
166
167
168
169
170
171
172

Q134
Q134
Q134
Department for Work and Pensions, ‘Taking action on climate risk: improving governance and reporting by
occupational pension schemes’, accessed 11 April 2021
Department for Work and Pensions, Taking action on climate risk: improving governance: improving governance
and reporting by occupational pension schemes, January 2021, p.19–21, 26, para 8
Department for Work and Pensions, Taking action on climate risk: improving governance: improving governance
and reporting by occupational pension schemes, January 2021, p.27–28, paras. 18–19
Department for Work and Pensions, Taking action on climate risk: improving governance: improving governance
and reporting by occupational pension schemes, January 2021, p.21

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

35

However, when their effects are aggregated, they may still have an impact on meeting
the net zero target. In responding to this Report, the Government should set out how
these smaller funds will be encouraged to integrate climate governance and reporting
requirements.

Appropriate transparency for consumers and ‘Greenwashing’
Greenwashing
118. For consumers to make effective choices they will need clear information to be able to
do so, and such information will need to be appropriate for all consumers. In its Net Zero
Review: Interim Report, the Treasury observed that:
Measures to improve information about low-carbon choices can help drive
consumer and producers towards alternative products. Examples include
information and educational campaigns; government advice centres and
online support services; and mandating improved labelling to help drive
consumer and producer choices towards low-carbon alternatives. They
usually come at low fiscal costs and can increase businesses’ accountability
to consumers for their emissions. However, they can come with high
compliance costs for businesses.173
119. However, we heard evidence that ‘greenwashing’—where products or funds are
labelled as ‘green’ or sustainable but may not be so—may be an issue, with the potential to
mislead consumers and cause capital misallocation.
120. The industry itself appeared aware of the danger that ‘greenwashing’ presented. Chris
Cummings, representing the Investment Association, told us that:
From that reputational point of view, ours is an industry that takes its
responsibilities incredibly seriously on this. We understand completely
the dangers of being accused of greenwashing. Part of the challenge is
finding investible projects, investible companies, that have a good story to
tell and are committed to transitioning. The danger we are all aware of is
greenwashing: finding something that looks a bit green and promoting it as
a green success story. That undermines everything we are trying to achieve.174
121. Dr Daniel Klier, Group Head of Sustainable Finance at HSBC, outlined the dangers
that ‘greenwashing’ may pose. He drew our attention to an annual investor survey that
suggested that 80% of respondents considered that lack of disclosure and consistent
definitions held back further investment into sustainability and the energy transition.175
Professor Nick Robins, Professor in Practice of Sustainable Finance, Grantham Research
Institute at the London School of Economics, agreed that data would allow investors to
distinguish between assets and understand “which investments and assets are aligned to
the transition”176 to net zero.

173
174
175
176

HM Treasury, Net Zero Review: Interim Report, December 2020, p 50, para 4.15
Q67
Q68
Q68

36

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

122. However, Saker Nusseibeh, Chief Executive Officer of Federated Hermes
International,177 took a more optimistic view of what ‘greenwashing’ might represent and
told us that:
… greenwashing is at least an acknowledgement by the industry that it is
important, that society thinks it is important, and that the regulator thinks
it is important to reduce carbon footprint. That must be a first step. The
second step is to have the taxonomy and the regulation to winnow away the
truth from that which is less true.178
123. When asked about the importance of greenwashing, Sheldon Mills, Interim Executive
Director of Strategy and Competition at the FCA, replied:
We do focus on greenwashing, quite a lot from the consumer perspective,
in terms of what is being delivered to consumers and the types of products
or funds they are investing in. There are two ways we interact with either
funds or products within our system. One is through our authorisations
work. If a fund is being authorised with us and it pertains to be an ESGrelated fund, we will look at that to see whether that is going to be clear, fair
or misleading. Is it what it says on the tin? We have seen instances where
what the fund says it is investing in does not really stack up with it being
ESG.179
However, he also noted the limits of the FCA’s remit:
In one sense, it is absolutely apposite to say that, if ESG is so broad that
funds go into things like greening fossil fuel companies a little bit, we might
not necessarily meet some of the goals, if the funds are not going into new
and innovative businesses that are really driving change in relation to those
goals. That is not entirely our role. Our role is, in a sense, to look to make
sure that the fund does what it says on the tin, and that has been our focus.180
124. The financial services industry broadly accepts that ‘greenwashing’ is detrimental
to good consumer outcomes and to the achievement of the net zero goal. The Treasury
must work with the FCA to ensure that the regulator has the appropriate remit, powers
and priorities, and uses its powers, to prevent ‘greenwashing’ of financial products
available to consumers.
125. We consider later in this Report, at paragraph 184, what steps might be taken to
implement a UK ‘green’ taxonomy, which could help to give more assurance that financial
products which are marketed as “green” are indeed contributing to the transition to net
zero.
Climate risk labels
126. In line with the potential for mandating improved labelling cited by Treasury in
its Net Zero Interim Review “…to help drive consumer and producer choices towards
177
178
179
180

Federated Hermes International is an asset manager
Q196
Q119
Q120

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

37

low-carbon alternatives”,181 Huw Evans, Director General of the Association of British
Insurers, told us that “if we are talking about retail investors as opposed to institutional
investors, we have to have a very straightforward set of explanations that do not mislead
and that enable those customers to fully understand the potential risks as well as the
potential rewards, to go alongside their motivation.”182
127. Some firms are already providing carbon labels on their products. Sandra Boss,
Global Head of Investment Stewardship at BlackRock told us that:
“[…], all our EMEA183 funds are now labelled with their carbon intensity.
That is something we are doing worldwide. We are really trying to help
people see the sustainability content of the product they are buying. That
will help as well. Hopefully, ultimately, they will also get those long-term
savings goals.”184
128. In February 2020, Andrew Bailey, then Chief Executive of the Financial Conduct
Authority, told us that a ‘visual rating system’ to disclose the carbon footprint of financial
products could be considered, but he believed that a “comprehensive approach would
currently be challenging”. He identified data and methodological limitations, such as
difficulties in sourcing appropriate data inputs; insufficient and inconsistent issuer-level
disclosure; and the lack of an agreed set of standards, metrics and criteria for defining
sustainable activities. Mr Bailey then referred to other product label initiatives, including
the EU’s development of an ‘eco label’, and UK industry plans by the Investment
Association and the British Standards Institution to consider product labels.185
129. We asked the Economic Secretary to the Treasury, John Glen MP, whether labelling
of funds or indices should distinguish between ‘green’ funds investing only in renewables
and those focused on transition finance which could include polluting companies. He
responded that “To what extent signposting and labelling of funds would need to be
adjusted is a technical matter and you would need to look very carefully at what industry
says”.186
130. Financial products should be clearly labelled to allow consumers to assess the
relative climate impacts of products and to make choices accordingly. However,
allowing every firm to create its own consumer sustainability labels may lead to
inconsistencies and consumer confusion. The Treasury and the Financial Conduct
Authority should consult on the merits of making climate or carbon labels for consumer
financial products mandatory, as a means to encourage innovation. The FCA should
consult on how best to make such labels readily and widely understood.
Passive investments and indices
131. Indices, such as the FTSE 100, are an important part of the investment landscape.
They sit at the heart of passive tracker funds (in which investments simply track an index),
which have risen in popularity.187 However, we heard two concerns related to indices in
181
182
183
184
185
186
187

HM Government, Net Zero Review Interim Report, December 2020, para. 4.15
Q188
Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMEA)
Q195
Financial Conduct Authority, Letter from CEO of FCA to Chair regarding Climate Risk, 24 February 2020, p 3
Q310
“Passive funds’ share of European investment market jumps to 20%”, Financial Times, 8 December 2020

38

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

terms of green finance, and which reflect the concerns already discussed in this report
around consumer choice. They are that:
•

popular indices such as the FTSE 100 may contain high carbon assets;188 and

•

Indices that purport to be ‘green’ or ESG compliant may have constituents that
appear not to match that label.

132. On the importance of indices, the previous Committee heard evidence from Simon
Howard, Chief Executive of the UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association, in
which he explained that this was also an issue for pension funds as most “will benchmark
their fund manager’s performance against a benchmark index, so indices are vitally
important”.189
133. In December 2019, the Guardian reported that the FTSE4Good indices, designed as
sustainable investment indices with clearly defined ESG criteria, had added oil companies
including Rosneft Oil and ConocoPhillips (13th and 15th largest oil companies by market
capitalisation) to the FTSE4Good index. The Guardian noted that the public factsheets
showed that 65 oil and gas companies were present on FTSE4Good’s emerging and
developed markets indices.190
134. Rachel Haworth, UK Policy Manager at ShareAction, a charity promoting responsible
investment, told the previous Committee that:
We need to ensure that we are promoting fossil fuel free indices. They need to
be mainstreamed. They need to be the default option, because otherwise, as
long as we have these kinds of small technical issues that completely change
the way markets are functioning, nothing is going to change substantially.191
135. We put to Sheldon Mills, Executive Director of Competition and Consumers at the
Financial Conduct Authority, concerns around investment indices, and in particular the
FTSE4Good index. He replied:
We do not have significant concerns, other than that from a general
viewpoint we would expect the indices to seek to ensure that they are
transparent as to what is on them. I cannot speak to that specific index,
but there should be a level of transparency so that people can take the right
choice based on the information available to them.192
136. On whether indices should be clearly marked, the Economic Secretary to the Treasury,
while noting the role of transparency and the education of finance professionals, told us
that:
The Benchmarks Regulation (the regulation governing investment fund
indices) includes disclosure requirements concerning how benchmark
administrators take into account Environmental, Social and Governance
factors. In 2019, two new categories of “climate-related benchmarks” were
188
189
190
191
192

“FTSE trackers expose investors to ‘stranded assets’, Citywire, 1 November 2016,
Oral evidence taken on 8 October 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q91 [Mr Baker, Simon Howard]
‘FTSE leaves coal and oil firms and G4S on ethical investment list’, The Guardian, 22 December 2019
Oral evidence taken on 8 October 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q93 [Mr Baker, Rachel Haworth]
Q121

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

39

also introduced under the Benchmarks Regulation. “Climate Transition
Benchmarks” (CTBs) must be constructed so that the underlying assets are
on a decarbonisation trajectory, while “Paris-Aligned Benchmarks” (PABs)
must be constructed so that the underlying assets are aligned with the
objectives of the Paris Climate Agreement. Together, these standards will
enhance the transparency and comparability of “low carbon” benchmarks
to enable investors to make more informed decisions.193
137. We note the concerns expressed about indices, in that the most popular may
be carbon-intensive, and those that purport to be green may have carbon-intensive
constituents. The risk remains that many consumers are unaware of the carbonintensity of the indices that their passive investments are tracking. The Treasury and
regulators should therefore ensure that all indices (whether conventional or climatefriendly) clearly set out the overall carbon footprint of the assets included within indices.
138. On the concerns around the constituents of indices described as ‘green’, we note
the requirements under the Benchmarks Regulation, which should be used to help
consumers make better choices. However, it is clear that in some cases the labels or
descriptions of ‘green’ or ‘climate-related’ indices do not necessarily match legitimate
consumer expectations of what they would commonly be understood to mean. The
Treasury and FCA should review the provisions in the legislative and regulatory
framework and ensure that the labels and descriptions of indices accurately reflect their
content, in line with consumer expectations.

Green product innovation
139. One of the ways consumer choice might be improved within Green Finance may be
through innovation. One of the aims set out by the Government for its Green Finance
Strategy was to “position the UK at the forefront of green financial innovation and data and
analytics”. It would do this by “creat[ing] an environment that catalyses UK innovation in
green finance products and services, including data and analytics, in collaboration with
regulators, industry, and academia”.194
140. The Green Finance Strategy also provided the following description of the UK’s record
in this area:
The UK has a strong record in green financial innovation ranging from
Yieldcos, green bonds and environmental, social and governance (ESG)
Exchange Traded Funds listed on the London Stock Exchange Group to
green mortgages and retail investment platforms.195
141. In July 2019, the Government implemented a key recommendation of the Green
Finance Taskforce and launched the Green Finance Institute (GFI). Envisaged as the “UK’s
principal forum for collaboration between the public and private sector with respect to
green finance”, it is intended to form an integral part in delivering the Government’s
193
194
195

HM Treasury, Letter from Economic Secretary relating to Decarbonisation and Green Finance, 16 December
2020, para. 14 -17
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, pp 10, 55
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 10

40

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Green Finance Strategy.196 The GFI states that it works with policymakers, industry and
academics, and that “in convening and leading action-focused coalitions, we foster the
design and promote the launch of innovative financial mechanisms that create commercial
revenue opportunities”.197
142. The Government has shown recent innovation, in announcing at Budget 2021 that
the Government will offer a green retail National Savings & Investment product in the
summer of 2021. The product will “give all UK savers the opportunity to take part in the
collective effort to tackle climate change […]”.198
143. Dr Daniel Klier, Group Head of Sustainable Finance at HSBC, provided this
description of when public money should be used to stimulate innovation:
The place where public money is needed is in technologies that are not yet
ready for market. Wind is a very good example where the UK was a world
leader by creating a framework that made the technology market ready and
then it was time to withdraw any subsidies.
If we think about the long list of technologies—hydrogen and electric
vehicles, and at some point we can talk about lowemission aviation and
the like—those are technologies where public money is needed to bring
them to the place where they are commercially viable. At the moment,
private money does not flow, unless you are an extraordinary risk taker
who seeks an extraordinary return at the end. Those are the technologies
where public money is needed, and the public also needs to be educated
enough to withdraw subsidies at the point when it is ready for commercial
application.199
144. Bruce Davis, Chief Executive Officer of Abundance Energy,200 told the previous
Committee that it had taken his company two years to become authorised by the Financial
Services Authority [predecessor to the Financial Conduct Authority] and that green
finance innovation was difficult. Mr Davis explained that this was because “It is long
term, it requires understanding of assets […] We are not seeing the credit knowledge and
expertise spread as widely as it could be, to bring down the costs of capital and speed the
flow.”201
145. Mr Davis also noted that although Barclays’ green mortgage product had
retrospectively shown “that people who make that decision are a better credit risk”,202
this knowledge had not been developed to create a “green Experian [Credit Reference
Agency]”.203 Mr Davis similarly noted that residential retrofits (such as installing solar
panels or insulation) did not yet signal a higher market value on the housing market and
“do not provide the sort of returns that you can get from […] a kitchen refurbishment”.204
196
197
198
199
200
201
202
203
204

Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, ‘Guidance Green finance Transition to a green financial
system and mobilising investment in clean and resilient growth’, accessed 18 March 2021
Green Finance Institute, ‘Our work’, accessed 18 March 2021
HM Treasury, Budget 2021, HC 1226, March 2021, para 2.145
Q85
Abundance Energy is an investment platform facilitating investments in sustainable projects
Oral evidence taken on 8 October 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q85 [Mr Streeting, Bruce Davis]
Oral evidence taken on 8 October 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q85 [Mr Streeting, Bruce Davis]
Oral evidence taken on 8 October 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q85, [Mr Streeting, Bruce Davis]
Oral evidence taken on 8 October 2019, HC (2017–19) 2233, Q85, [Mr Streeting, Bruce Davis]

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

41

146. In relation to insurance, Huw Evans, Chief Executive Officer of the Association of
British Insurers, told us that the industry was beginning to make more use of ‘resilient
repair’, in which homes in high flood risk areas are repaired in a way that is resilient
to future flood incidents, and suggested that “use of apps, greater knowledge, and more
specific data modelling about incidents of flooding”205 would enable customers to buy
products that were more responsive to their flood risk.
147. The pace of innovation still appeared laggardly to some who gave evidence. Legal
and General told us that “green financial products for retail customers (eg mortgages,
though we have recently launched an equity release product with additional cashback
for green housing modifications) have not developed quickly enough.”206 Barclays, when
considering business investment, noted that:
There are already a number of green products available in the marketplace
that are contributing to the net zero goal, including ‘use of proceeds’ loans
which are relatively easy to identify (e.g. for Wind, Solar etc.). However, more
needs to be done in the corporate space, where an appropriate incentive
structure is required to encourage small, medium and large corporates to
select projects that will advance net zero (e.g. opting for electric vehicles or
sustainable supply chains, or focusing on the reduction of emissions).207
148. In its October 2018 Discussion Paper Climate Change and Green Finance, the FCA
noted that “the FCA has a clear role to ensure markets for green finance are open to new
entrants and innovation, enabling successful firms to thrive and deliver better outcomes
for consumers.”208 Sheldon Mills, Interim Executive Director of Strategy and Competition
at the Financial Conduct Authority, told us that:
To excite consumers you need exciting products. If you want to excite the
youth, you need apps that tell you how your investments might relate to
ESG, et cetera. We, in 2019, had our green fintech challenge. We selected
nine products. Some of them have even gone to market, which is fantastic.
We are encouraging innovation to come in through the door, and working
through how we can remove regulatory barriers, so we can have ESGrelated financial services products growing up.209
149. The Government’s Green Finance Strategy noted the need for innovation in green
finance products and services, yet the evidence we have received suggests that the pace
of innovation could be accelerated and that more could be done to encourage take-up.
The Financial Conduct Authority should seriously consider undertaking further “green
fintech challenges” to encourage innovation. The regulator should also set out how it
will tackle remaining regulatory barriers which discourage innovative ‘green’ financial
products from coming to market. The Government and the regulators should work more
closely with the Green Finance Institute to bring innovative ideas which will benefit
consumers to the market.
205
206
207
208
209

Q203
Legal and General (DEC0120) p 5
Barclays (DEC0052) p 2
Financial Conduct Authority, Climate Change and Green Finance Discussion Paper DP18/8, (October 2018), p9,
para 4.4
Q161

42

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

4 Regulators and regulation
150. Regulation will play a key role in meeting the net zero target. In this chapter, we
consider:
•

The remit of the regulators;

•

Prudential risks and the capital regime;

•

Climate-related financial disclosures and a suitable taxonomy to encourage
transparency.

Remit of the Prudential Regulation Committee and the Financial
Conduct Authority
151. The Government’s Green Finance Strategy in 2019 recognised the role that the financial
regulators—Bank of England, Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), and the Pensions
Regulator (TPR)—will play in greening the UK financial system.210 In that Strategy, the
Government made the following commitment:
For the Prudential Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Authority,
we will ensure that the need to have regard to the COP21 Paris Agreement
when considering how to advance their objectives and discharge their
functions is reflected in the next Letter of Recommendations that HM
Treasury issues to each authority.211
152. Witnesses supported amending the remit letters to the Financial Conduct Authority
and the Prudential Regulation Authority, to take account of climate change.212 Following
our query as to the delay behind issuing updated remit letters to the regulators, the
Economic Secretary to the Treasury confirmed in November 2020 that the remit letters
for the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority would be
updated, and that it was “an urgent priority for us to get this right”.213
153. We therefore welcome the Chancellor of the Exchequer’s recent letters to the Financial
Conduct Authority214 and to the Prudential Regulation Committee215 amending their
remits to “have regard to the government’s commitment to achieve a net-zero economy by
2050 under the Climate Change Act 2008 (Order 2019) when considering how to advance
its objectives and discharge its functions”.
154. The Prudential Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Authority should
move quickly to incorporate their revised remits to include climate change. We will
continue to monitor their progress and ongoing approach to the risks arising from
climate change.
210
211
212
213
214
215

HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 8
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 22
Qq232–234
Qq278–279
HM Treasury, Letter of Recommendations for the Financial Conduct Authority, 23 March 2021
HM Treasury, Letter of Recommendations for the Prudential Regulation Committee, 23 March 2021

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

43

Prudential risks and the capital regime
155. We heard evidence about the underlying prudential risks from financial firms’
continued investment in fossil fuels and the associated ‘stranded assets’ risk. Stranded
assets is a term for assets which turn out to be worth less than expected as a result of changes
linked to the transition to a low-carbon economy.216 The FCA’s Handbook identifies
prudential risks as “those that can reduce the adequacy of its financial resources, and as a
result may adversely affect confidence in the financial system or prejudice consumers”. It
offers examples of key prudential risks: credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk, operational
risk, insurance risk and group risk.217
156. In March 2020, the Governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, told us that
the market was not accurately ‘pricing in’ climate risks.218 The significance of this point is
that the potential financial consequences of climate-related risks could create a systemic
risk with implications for financial stability. The Bank of International Settlements (BIS)
describes these risks as comprising:
•

physical risks which affect the value of financial assets;

•

transition risk which may result from the adjustment of asset prices towards a
low-carbon economy; and

•

liability risks arising from increased compensation paid out as a result of climate
change.219

157. Mark Carney, former Governor of the Bank of England, wrote to us in early 2020,
noting that:
If commitments to net-zero are realised, many carbon-related assets will
not be viable. At one extreme, the IPCC 1.5 degree report finds that no more
than 349 Gt220 of carbon can be emitted, assuming a target probability of
66% for limiting the rise in global temperatures to 1.5°C. In contrast, proven
oil and gas reserves contain approximately 510 Gt of carbon, and coal
reserves another 425 Gt221—meaning that the combustion of developed oil
and gas reserves alone would exceed the budget for 1.5 degrees of warming.
According to a frequently cited academic study,222 80% of the world’s
known coal reserves, 30% of oil, and 50% of gas reserves are unburnable
if emissions are to be consistent with keeping temperature rises below 2
degrees.223
158. Positive Money, a research and campaign organisation, submitted evidence which
suggests that financial loss from the drop in value of fossil fuels is already underway. It
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223

Carbon Tracker, ‘Stranded Assets’, accessed 18 March 2021
Financial Conduct Authority, ‘PRU 1.4.3’, accessed 12 April 2021
Oral evidence taken on 4 March 2020, HC (2019–21) 122 Q62 ([Julie Marson, Andrew Bailey]
Bank of International Settlements, ‘Research on climate-related risks and financial stability: An “epistemological
break”?’, accessed 12 April 2021
Gigatonnes (Gt)
Global Gas and Oil Network, Oil, Gas and The Climate: An analysis of Oil and Gas Industry Plans for Expansion
and Compatibility with Global Emission Limits, December 2019, p 3
McGlade and Ekins, “The geographical distribution of fossil fuels unused when limiting global warming to 2C”
Nature, vol 517, 187–190 (2015)
Bank of England, Letter from Governor to Chair regarding Climate Risk, February 2020, p.2

44

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

cited a report by Carbon Tracker224 showing that the EU’s largest five power generators
had lost over 37% of their value between 2008 and 2013. It also drew our attention to
projections by Mercer225 suggesting that the annual returns from coal could decline by
an amount in a range from 18 per cent to 74 per cent over the next 35 years.226 Mark
Carney also told us that market prices had begun to adjust, noting that “the transition
away from coal has resulted in the combined market capitalisation of the top four US coal
producers falling by over 99% since the end of 2010”227 and cited research228 which found
that undeveloped reserves have a negative impact oil firms’ value.
159. Ms Sarah Breedon, Executive Director for UK Deposit Takers Supervision at the Bank
of England, acknowledged that the mispricing of the market was a “potentially systemic
risk” to the UK financial system. She told us that this was why the Bank of England was
stress testing the largest banks and insurers, in order to get visibility of how the value of
real and financial assets might change “in order to drive different decisions today, so that
the transition we see is an early and orderly one”.229
160. Ms Breedon also told us that in order for the market to price climate risk correctly, two
things were required: the market needed the right information and a better understanding
of what might happen in terms of climate outcomes and climate policy. Ms Breedon
considered that improved disclosure and scenario analysis would help resolve both of
these issues.230 She also pointed out that the volatile experience of asset prices during the
pandemic “will have made financial institutions much more sensitised to the possibility of
these risks and these stranded assets”.231
161. However, while acknowledging the risk of stranded assets, some witnesses to the
inquiry were unwilling to divest from fossil fuel assets, arguing that there is an appropriate
investment strategy in oil and gas companies. Sandra Boss, representing BlackRock, told
us that many of these oil and gas companies are:
[…] managing the transition very well. Those that are not managing it as
well are increasingly finding their cost of capital goes up, so over time our
clients’ assets are ever so gradually shifting towards the superior performers
on sustainability.232
162. Similarly, Steve Waygood, Chief Responsible Investment Officer at Aviva Investors,
argued that investors would have more influence over companies that needed to transition,
such as BP, by remaining invested: “The divestment calls to action are not calls to action
at all. We need to use our voice and our vote, […] to power that transition by correcting
the market”.233 Mr Waygood further noted that investors would only cease to fund oil and
gas once the Government had made it a bad investment by “doing the transition plans
towards net zero effectively, soon, and internalising the cost of capital where it should
belong.”234
224
225
226
227
228
229
230
231
232
233
234

A think tank that carries out analysis of the impact of the energy transition on capital markets and the potential
investment in high-cost, carbon-intensive fossil fuels.
An asset management firm
Positive Money (DUE0062) submission
Bank of England, Letter from Governor to Chair regarding Climate Risk, February 2020, p.2
Atanasova and Schwartz, ‘Stranded fossil fuel reserves and firm value’, NBER Working Papers 26497 (2015)
Q136
Q135
Q135
Q231
Q231
Q231

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

45

163. Given these risks, some witnesses raised possible regulatory options around the
capital regime, such as a “brown penalising factor” or a “green supporting factor”. Simon
Howard, Chief Executive of the UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association, told
the previous Committee in 2019 that “my bank members are increasingly warm to the
idea that a change is being made to the capital regime to make it easier to lend to green
stuff and to steer money away from brown stuff, but they all say that we need data, we need
understanding and we need to prove that it is long-term sustainable.”235
164. Dr Daniel Klier, Group Head of Sustainable Finance at HSBC, told us that “there is
a very live discussion about anticipating the expected lower risk of green investments in
some form of a green supporting factor. […] We all believe that green investments are
lower risk. […]”.236 Dr Klier continued by saying that HSBC had analysed a very large
population and found that outperformance versus the market was 10% over six months.237
165. Rather than supporting a brown penalising factor or a green supporting factor, Steve
Waygood proposed a scaling factor that took into account the underlying asset’s alignment
with the Paris Agreement, particularly the 1.5C scenario.238
166. Mark Carney, former Governor of the Bank of England, commented in his February
2020 letter that where there was evidence that green assets were less risky, this could be
factored into the internal models used by banks to calculate capital requirements. He cited
Bank of England analysis which had found mortgages against energy-efficient properties
were 18% less likely to default.239 However, Mr Carney concluded that “absent explicit
direction in its remit, the Bank would not advantage green lending in its risk-based
supervision” as to do otherwise “would be to mix climate policy with prudential policy”.
He also noted that the Bank of England was “examining the case for a brown-penalising
factor that introduces additional capital charges on polluting and potentially risky
activities”, but he observed that a lack of an accepted definition of ‘brown’, the possibility
of activities transitioning from ‘brown’ to ‘green’, and the absence of data to measure
the riskiness of an asset, remained impediments to implementing such a measure. Mr
Carney added that the Bank of England was addressing the issue by contributing research
to the Network on Greening the Financial System’s240 review of the quantification of risk
differentials, and that the 2021 climate stress test would provide additional data.241
167. When we subsequently invited Sarah Breedon to comment on the option of a “brown
penalising factor”, she suggested that the Bank needed to gain visibility of assets through
its proposed climate stress test before it could consider the matter.242 The Economic
Secretary to the Treasury told us that a “brown penalising factor” was not something
he had considered specifically, and he suggested that what was needed, was to price in
risk and have transparency around capital allocation. However, he added that all issues
235
236
237
238
239
240

241
242

Oral evidence taken on 8 October 2019 HC (2017–19) 2233, Q85, [Wes Streeting, Simon Howard]
Q75
Q76
Q209
Guin and Korhonen, Does energy efficiency predict mortgage performance?, Bank of England Staff Working
Paper No.852, (2020)
Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) was established in
December 2017 by eight central banks and supervisors, to strengthen the global response needed to meet the
goals of the Paris agreement. The NGFS promotes best practices and conducts or commissions analytical work on
green finance.
Bank of England, Letter from Governor to Chair regarding Climate Risk, February 2020, p.2
Q145

46

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

remained under review.243
168. We have heard differing evidence on whether there should be amendments to the
capital regimes to promote net zero. In light of its new remit letter, the Bank of England
must now explain its thinking, as to what measures it might consider appropriate for
the capital regime to better accommodate the climate risk associated with different
investments. It should set out its views on the options for amending the capital regimes
to reflect its new remit, taking into account the potential interaction with the other aims
of prudential policy.

TCFD implementation and mainstreaming of green finance
169. In December 2015, the Financial Stability Board, an international body that
monitors and makes recommendations about the global financial system, announced the
establishment of a Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD).244 Mark
Carney, then FSB Chair, outlined what the FSB hoped the taskforce would achieve, telling
the COP21 Paris Climate Change Conference that:
The FSB is asking the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
to make recommendations for consistent company disclosures that will
help financial market participants understand their climate-related risks.
Access to high quality financial information will allow market participants
and policymakers to understand and better manage those risks, which are
likely to grow with time.245
170. The TCFD published its recommendations in June 2017 on voluntary climate-related
financial disclosures across four areas: governance, strategy, risk management, and
metrics and targets, alongside 11 recommended disclosures.246 The TCFD also developed
a tool to provide transparency around firms’ assets and carbon emissions, in order to
allow businesses and investors to make sustainable investment choices more easily and to
hold firms accountable.
171. In its July 2019 Green Finance Strategy, the Government set out its expectation that all
listed companies and large asset holders disclose in line with TCFD recommendations by
2022, and it established a joint taskforce with UK regulators to explore the most effective
way to approach disclosure and the appropriateness of mandatory reporting.247
172. We heard evidence which suggested that, in the absence of a mandatory approach,
there was an appetite in the industry for a wider and faster roll-out of TCFD-aligned
disclosures. Sandra Boss, representing BlackRock, acknowledged that the Financial
Conduct Authority had consulted on TCFD disclosures from premium listed issuers but
noted that:
243
244
245
246
247

Q327
FSB to establish Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Financial Stability Board, press release, 4
December 2015
FSB to establish Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Financial Stability Board, press release, 4
December 2015
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, Recommendations of the Taskforce on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures Final Report, (June 2017), p iv
HM Treasury and Department for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy, Green finance strategy; Transforming
Finance for a Greener Future, July 2019, p 8

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

47

We think it could go faster. We would like it to ask for them in 2021. We
would like to see it making this a requirement for all listed companies, not
just the premium listed, and we want to make sure it is a requirement, not
just a soft “comply and explain”.248
173. Similarly, Chris Cummings, Chief Executive Officer at the Investment Association,
supported TCFD disclosures by listed companies and pointed out that the Investment
Association had asked its members to insist that FTSE-listed investee companies report
against TCFD; and he noted that “the majority of FTSE companies have now signed up to
that.”249 Dr Daniel Klier, Group Head of Sustainable Finance at HSBC, agreed that twothirds of the FTSE 100 provides some level of TCFD disclosure, but he noted that the level
of disclosure was very inconsistent, with only 4% of companies following the full TCFD
guidelines.250
174. We also heard evidence that disclosures would form part of witnesses’ strategies
for shareholder votes at company AGMs. Sandra Boss told us that BlackRock had asked
companies to report using the TCFD framework:
We identified 400 companies that we thought were the most carbonintensive in our portfolio. […] Immediately, in this voting season, we did
two things. First, we took 61 votes. It was 55 companies. We said, “These
companies are not yet doing as much as we think they should be doing”,
and either we voted against directors or we voted in favour of shareholder
proposals.”251
175. Steve Waygood supported shareholder votes on TCFD, and he proposed that in
addition “the TCFD report itself should be an advisory vote on a standing basis at company
AGMs”.252 He believed that if the TCFD report were to be buried within wider reporting
requirements, its impact might be limited.
176. In November 2020, the UK’s Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce published
its interim report and roadmap setting out the Government’s intention to introduce
mandatory climate-related financial disclosure requirements across the UK economy by
2025. The report concluded that “given the urgency of the climate threat, a voluntary
approach to climate-related financial disclosure may not be sufficient”.253
177. The Taskforce roadmap sets out an indicative path illustrating how disclosures
could cover seven categories of organisation over the next five years: listed commercial
companies, UK-registered companies, banks and building societies, insurance companies,
asset managers, life insurers and FCA-regulated pension schemes, and occupational
schemes.254 The roadmap also noted that initial steps have been made to introduce TCFDaligned disclosures for certain listed companies, banks and building societies, insurance
companies and occupational pension schemes.255 It also points out that the Financial
Conduct Authority is proposing further measures for asset managers, life insurers, and
248
249
250
251
252
253
254
255

Q234
Q68
Q68
Q222
Q235
HM Treasury, Interim Report UK Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce, 9 November 2020, p 9, para 1.18
HM Treasury, Interim Report UK Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce, 9 November 2020, p 11, para 2.2
HM Treasury, Interim Report UK Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce, 9 November 2020, p 12, para 2.9

48

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

FCA-regulated pension schemes.256
178. Looking ahead, the Roadmap states that:
In the coming years, UK Taskforce member organisations will take forward
the strategies outlined in the Roadmap, subject to consultation and other
statutory requirements. The UK Taskforce will continue to monitor the
progress of the cross-sectoral implementation strategy to ensure that a
coordinated approach is maintained. The Government will provide an
update on progress in the 2022 refresh of the Green Finance Strategy.257
179. We took oral evidence from the Economic Secretary to the Treasury following the
publication of the Roadmap. When we put it to him that the voluntary approach had not
been working, he replied:
We consulted considerably. We know there is a massive appetite. We made
progress with large financial institutions. We are doing this in alignment
with them but it is necessary to say that there is an expectation that we
make progress here. There is staging around what a lot will do by 2023. It
was a balance and there has not been significant dissent from this decision.
It is seen as being in line with the direction in which we were moving, and
others would criticise us for not doing this sooner. It is about getting that
balance right.258
180. When the Economic Secretary was pressed on the differing timelines for
implementation, he said:
It is about the appropriateness of the rigidity of those timeframes, based
on the size of businesses and sectors. […] but it is about saying what is
accommodatable in different sectors in different timeframes. As I say, there
is a conversation that has been going on to make sure that this is sustainable
and achievable by a vast majority, and that is what has guided us.259
181. Steve Waygood, Chief Responsible Investment Officer at Aviva Investors, warned us
that TCFD disclosure reporting might be insufficient:
It does not require that we align our portfolios with net zero. We should
require all financial institutions saying they support [the] Paris [accord] to
do more than just the TCFD report. They need science-based targets, to set
out what capital they will put towards financing the transition and to set
out their engagement strategy.”260
Dr Emily Shuckburgh, Director of Cambridge Zero at Cambridge University argued that
TCFD reporting could be expanded to include Scope 3 emissions—tracing emissions
through supply chains—which would be “influential in moving TCFD from something
that just the larger firms are focused on and broadening it throughout the economy, in an
efficient way”.261
256
257
258
259
260
261

HM Treasury, Interim Report UK Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce, 9 November 2020, p. 12 para 2.10
HM Treasury, A Roadmap towards mandatory climate-related disclosures, November 2020, p 9 , para 1.21
Q287
Q288
Q213
Q105

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

49

182. The Government has moved from a voluntary to a mandatory approach for
ensuring that firms make climate-related financial disclosures. But the process will
be run to different timetables for different firms, across different regulators according
to the Roadmap published by the Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce. The
Treasury, via the Taskforce, will need to play a key role in ensuring that pressure is
maintained for a consistent and rapid implementation of these disclosures.
183. We also draw the Treasury’s attention to evidence suggesting that the disclosure
regime could be widened in scope, and that firms might usefully offer fuller disclosures.

Sustainable taxonomy
184. In November 2020, the Chancellor confirmed that the UK would implement a green
taxonomy—a common framework for determining which activities can be defined as
environmentally sustainable. The UK taxonomy would “take the scientific metrics in the
EU taxonomy as its basis” and a UK Green Technical Advisory Group would be established
“to review these metrics to ensure they are right for the UK market”.262
185. When asked on the timeline for the implementation of a green taxonomy, the
Economic Secretary told us that:
Regarding implementation of the green taxonomy, you will be aware that
the government has made the necessary amendments to retained EU law to
ensure that the UK has an effective framework for implementation of the
taxonomy after the end of the EU exit transition period.263 As part of that
legislation, the government is required to publish the technical screening
criteria for climate change adaptation and mitigation by the end of 2021, and
for the remaining four environmental objectives by 2023. The Government
will be launching a Green Technical Advisory Group in 2021 to advise, on
an ongoing basis, on improvements that could be made to the taxonomy to
better facilitate the UK’s environmental goals.264
186. Several witnesses told us of the need for such a taxonomy. Huw Evans, Director
General of the Association of British Insurers, told us that “we have to have a common
language that we talk about when we talk about what options are available to customers”.265
Similarly, Sandra Boss, Global Head of Investment Stewardship at BlackRock, referencing
the EU taxonomy, saw an opportunity for the UK to design its own solution and noted
that a product taxonomy for ESG investing was very important.266 Sheldon Mills, Interim
Executive Director of Strategy and Competition of the FCA, outlined the importance of a
taxonomy when thinking about the implementation of the TCFD. He noted that:
It is not sufficient for us just to have a rule that says, “Disclose against these
11 principles under TCFD.” … There is no common approach; there is no
common taxonomy that underlies that and allows for comparability and
262
263
264
265
266

HM Treasury, “Chancellor sets out ambition for future of financial services”, accessed 18 February 2021
The Securities Financing Transactions, Securitisation and Miscellaneous Amendments (EU Exit) Regulations 2020
(SI 2020/1385)
HM Treasury, Letter from Economic Secretary relating to Decarbonisation and Green Finance, 16 December
2020, para. 18
Q188
Q191

50

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

so on. In terms of the EU sustainable work, even though we will not be
applying that rule, because it will come into force after we have exited, we
will naturally be working with Government as to how they think about the
UK’s approach to taxonomy and those sorts of issues.267
187. Chris Cummings, Chief Executive Officer at the Investment Association, did though
point to work which the Investment Association had done on a “responsible investment
framework”. He explained that:
The framework we have published goes beyond what we have seen in the
European Union. It goes to the point I made about the UK’s pre-eminence
and our desire to be recognised as world leaders and build on that position.
Ultimately, it is about bringing consistency of language and approach, so
that investors can have real confidence that the money they are investing
is being put to good use, in the way they would expect, and we can report
back on that.268
188. As noted above, the UK is not alone in developing such a taxonomy. An EU taxonomy
for sustainable activities was developed269 and came into force on 12 July 2020, following
the recommendation of the ‘Commission action plan on financing sustainable growth’.
The EU taxonomy establishes six environmental objectives, and tasks the Commission
with establishing the actual list of environmentally sustainable activities through
delegated acts. So far, the first delegated act on sustainable finance is due to be adopted
in April 2021, and the taxonomy for the remaining environmental objectives should be
established by the end of 2021 and will apply by end 2022. The first company reports and
investor disclosures using the EU taxonomy are due at the start of 2022, covering the
financial year 2021.270
189. The Economic Secretary to the Treasury wrote to the House of Commons European
Scrutiny Committee in June 2020, recognising that the EU taxonomy will play an
“important role in the development of Green Finance and in preventing greenwashing,
an important UK objective”; and he confirmed the Government’s commitment to “at least
match the ambition of the objectives of the EU Sustainable Finance Action Plan”.271
190. Inconsistencies may arise if different jurisdictions develop their own taxonomies
independently. Mr Sheldon Mills, Interim Executive Director of Strategy and Competition
at the FCA, told us that the Financial Conduct Authority was working with IOSCO
[International Organisation of Securities Commissions] ahead of COP 26 to create “some
sort of international framework which would allow for some sort of common taxonomy
across these disclosures”.272 Anthony Raymond, General Counsel and Director of
Legal Services, Policy and Advisory Directorate at the Pensions Regulator, agreed that
“international parity, the taxonomy and that level playing field will be really important in
the future”.273

267
268
269
270
271
272
273

Q123
Q68
Commission Regulation (EU) No. 2020/852
European Commission, ‘Implementing and delegated acts’, accessed 19 February 2021
HM Treasury, EST letter to Sir William Cash MP, 28 May 2020
Q161
Q166

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

51

191. The Economic Secretary to the Treasury recognised the need for international
consensus to avoid conflicting taxonomies, and he told us that in relation to the UK’s
taxonomy and climate-related disclosures there was “a lot of discussion in different
jurisdictions about exactly what the taxonomy should be, and we need to be very clear
about that so that the regulators are in a position to enforce that.”274 The Economic
Secretary recognised that the UK’s presidency of the G7 and COP 26 “gives us a real
opportunity to set frameworks and work collaboratively to drive forward the clarity that
we need”.275
192. A taxonomy is an important part of identifying what can be considered green
investment, so the announcement of a UK taxonomy is welcome. The Treasury and
regulators should work at speed to ensure that there is a clear timetable and legislative
pathway to deliver a UK taxonomy ahead of COP26 in November 2021. The UK can
utilise the EU’s taxonomy but can exceed it when it will assist the UK’s goals. The UK
should seize the opportunity presented by COP26 to use its own work on a taxonomy to
push for greater international convergence.

274
275

Q279
Q282

52

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Conclusions and recommendations
The economic opportunities and costs of net zero
1.

Although the Government has emphasised the need for a “green” recovery, we note
it has not, except in limited circumstances, imposed green conditionality on the
support it has provided during the coronavirus pandemic. Whilst it is clear that
support schemes were required to be provided without delay the Treasury should
set out why it did not include green conditionality for the Recovery Loan Scheme
announced in the 2021 Budget. (Paragraph 23)

2.

The Government has made bold claims that the economic recovery will be a green
recovery. In order to achieve that, the Government needs to set out in its Net
Zero Strategy who, at ministerial level, will be responsible for delivering net zero,
coordinating the roles of different departments, and ensuring that the UK remains
on track to meet its net zero target in a cost-effective way. (Paragraph 30)

3.

In the Net Zero Review final report, the Government should set out what mechanisms
it will put in place to integrate the net zero target within departments’ spending
review commitments, and how departments will be held to account should they fail
to meet their targets. (Paragraph 35)

4.

The Chancellor should publish the Net Zero Strategy as soon as possible and should set
out, in conjunction with the Net Zero Review final report, the principles upon which
the UK will fund its transition to net zero carbon emissions by 2050. (Paragraph 46)

5.

There are a number of different estimates of the cost of achieving net zero by 2050.
However, the Government has not yet committed to its own cost estimates and should
set these out as soon as possible. The Government should include in the Net Zero
Review final report its own methodology on costs; and it should set out clearly where
the uncertainties lie. The Treasury should also include a range of scenarios on how
net zero might be achieved, and the associated cost for each scenario. (Paragraph 47)

6.

The Treasury’s Net Zero Review final report should include clear sectoral pathways
towards decarbonisation and should address the key policy decisions as to the future
of high carbon industries. Particular attention should be given to the potential
regional impact of those decisions, and the Government should set out a framework
and strategy for supporting those communities which will be most impacted by these
changes. This is especially important given the Government’s commitment to a Just
Transition as part of the Paris Agreement. (Paragraph 53)
Green finance to support green decarbonisation

7.

The Government has recognised that private finance will need to play a key part in
funding the transition to net zero. If it is to do so, the Government will need to provide
long-term certainty in climate-related policy and must ensure that consistent policy
signals are sent to investors. We are encouraged that the Government acknowledged
these needs in the 2021 Budget. (Paragraph 59)

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

53

8.

We welcome the announcement in the 2021 Budget of a timetable for the issuance of
the UK’s first green sovereign bond or ‘green gilt’. However, the UK is lagging behind
other countries in the issuance of these green bonds. This runs the risk of holding back
the development of a private sterling green bond market. Although concerns about
the potential for green bonds to be a more expensive form of debt for the Government
seem to have dissipated to a degree, the Government should none the less set out its
tolerance, when issuing such bonds, for them to be more expensive than other forms of
Government debt. (Paragraph 66)

9.

We note the new remit provided to the Monetary Policy Committee, which will
allow it to rebalance its Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme to take account of the
climate impact of the bonds it holds. We will continue to scrutinise this process and
will examine how any changes are enacted, and how those changes impact on the
other policy objectives and the independence of the Monetary Policy Committee.
(Paragraph 74)

10.

We note the debate at the Productive Finance Working Group Steering Committee on
retail access to the ‘long term asset fund’ (LTAF). There should be clarity about who
will have access to the LTAF. The Chancellor and the financial regulators should set
out the timeframe for the launch of the announced ‘long term asset fund’ to allow
pension savers to invest in long-term projects. We would expect that such an LTAF
would be focused on providing a net-zero compliant product. (Paragraph 80)

11.

The Treasury should, as part of its review of Solvency II, consider reforms that could
improve the funding of sustainable green infrastructure while maintaining the
financial stability of insurers. (Paragraph 84)

12.

In the proposed framework for the new UK Infrastructure Bank, the Chancellor
should clarify its governance arrangements, how investment decisions will be made,
and how it will ensure that it attracts sufficient private capital. In particular, it should
clearly set out how the Bank will meet the Government’s commitment to Net Zero.
The Government should also set out how it will incorporate lessons learned from the
former Green Investment Bank, and whether it intends that the UK Infrastructure
Bank should be funded to offer a lending facility at a level similar to that offered by
the European Investment Bank before the UK referendum on membership of the EU.
(Paragraph 95)
The role of consumers

13.

There is a high level of inertia amongst consumers around defined contribution
pension fund choice, with most remaining in the ‘default’ fund. The Treasury has
been robust in its view that default funds should not be required to move to more
green alternatives, but at the same time maintains that consumers should not have
to switch out of the default fund to invest sustainably. The Government should
resolve this apparent contradiction. At present the Treasury is relying on a blend
of disclosure, regulation and public investment to foster a transition towards more
sustainable investment. For now, we support that approach, but the Treasury should
report regularly on the proportion of pension holders in defined contribution pension
schemes who remain in the default fund, and the extent to which those default funds
are aligned with a path to Net Zero. (Paragraph 108)

54

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

14.

Consumers who hold defined benefits pensions have no choice as to how their assets
are allocated. They rely upon their trustees. We note that previous attempts to get
defined benefit schemes to acknowledge Environmental Social and Governance
concerns have not been entirely successful. In its phased approach to implementing
the regulations, the Pensions Regulator will need to consider how to reach smaller
pension schemes. The draft regulations appear to exclude the smallest trust schemes.
However, when their effects are aggregated, they may still have an impact on meeting
the net zero target. In responding to this Report, the Government should set out how
these smaller funds will be encouraged to integrate climate governance and reporting
requirements. (Paragraph 117)

15.

The financial services industry broadly accepts that ‘greenwashing’ is detrimental to
good consumer outcomes and to the achievement of the net zero goal. The Treasury
must work with the FCA to ensure that the regulator has the appropriate remit, powers
and priorities, and uses its powers, to prevent ‘greenwashing’ of financial products
available to consumers. (Paragraph 124)

16.

Financial products should be clearly labelled to allow consumers to assess the
relative climate impacts of products and to make choices accordingly. However,
allowing every firm to create its own consumer sustainability labels may lead to
inconsistencies and consumer confusion. The Treasury and the Financial Conduct
Authority should consult on the merits of making climate or carbon labels for
consumer financial products mandatory, as a means to encourage innovation. The
FCA should consult on how best to make such labels readily and widely understood.
(Paragraph 130)

17.

We note the concerns expressed about indices, in that the most popular may be
carbon-intensive, and those that purport to be green may have carbon-intensive
constituents. The risk remains that many consumers are unaware of the carbonintensity of the indices that their passive investments are tracking. The Treasury and
regulators should therefore ensure that all indices (whether conventional or climatefriendly) clearly set out the overall carbon footprint of the assets included within
indices. (Paragraph 137)

18.

On the concerns around the constituents of indices described as ‘green’, we note
the requirements under the Benchmarks Regulation, which should be used to help
consumers make better choices. However, it is clear that in some cases the labels
or descriptions of ‘green’ or ‘climate-related’ indices do not necessarily match
legitimate consumer expectations of what they would commonly be understood
to mean. The Treasury and FCA should review the provisions in the legislative and
regulatory framework and ensure that the labels and descriptions of indices accurately
reflect their content, in line with consumer expectations. (Paragraph 138)

19.

The Government’s Green Finance Strategy noted the need for innovation in green
finance products and services, yet the evidence we have received suggests that the
pace of innovation could be accelerated and that more could be done to encourage
take-up. The Financial Conduct Authority should seriously consider undertaking
further “green fintech challenges” to encourage innovation. The regulator should also
set out how it will tackle remaining regulatory barriers which discourage innovative
‘green’ financial products from coming to market. The Government and the regulators

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

55

should work more closely with the Green Finance Institute to bring innovative ideas
which will benefit consumers to the market. (Paragraph 149)
20.

The Prudential Regulation Authority and Financial Conduct Authority should
move quickly to incorporate their revised remits to include climate change. We will
continue to monitor their progress and ongoing approach to the risks arising from
climate change. (Paragraph 154)

21.

We have heard differing evidence on whether there should be amendments to the
capital regimes to promote net zero. In light of its new remit letter, the Bank of England
must now explain its thinking, as to what measures it might consider appropriate for
the capital regime to better accommodate the climate risk associated with different
investments. It should set out its views on the options for amending the capital regimes
to reflect its new remit, taking into account the potential interaction with the other
aims of prudential policy. (Paragraph 168)

22.

The Government has moved from a voluntary to a mandatory approach for ensuring
that firms make climate-related financial disclosures. But the process will be run
to different timetables for different firms, across different regulators according to
the Roadmap published by the Joint Government Regulator TCFD Taskforce. The
Treasury, via the Taskforce, will need to play a key role in ensuring that pressure
is maintained for a consistent and rapid implementation of these disclosures.
(Paragraph 182)

23.

We also draw the Treasury’s attention to evidence suggesting that the disclosure
regime could be widened in scope, and that firms might usefully offer fuller
disclosures. (Paragraph 183)

24.

A taxonomy is an important part of identifying what can be considered green
investment, so the announcement of a UK taxonomy is welcome. The Treasury and
regulators should work at speed to ensure that there is a clear timetable and legislative
pathway to deliver a UK taxonomy ahead of COP26 in November 2021. The UK can
utilise the EU’s taxonomy but can exceed it when it will assist the UK’s goals. The UK
should seize the opportunity presented by COP26 to use its own work on a taxonomy
to push for greater international convergence. (Paragraph 192)

56

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Formal minutes
Wednesday 14 April 2021
Members present:
Mel Stride, in the Chair
Rushanara Ali

Dame Angela Eagle

Harriett Baldwin

Julie Marson

Anthony Browne

Siobhain McDonagh

Felicity Buchan

Alison Thewliss

Draft Report (Net zero and the Future of Green Finance), proposed by the Chair, brought
up and read.
Ordered, That the draft Report be read a second time, paragraph by paragraph.
Paragraphs 1 to 192 read and agreed to.
Summary agreed to.
Resolved, That the Report be the Thirteenth Report of the Committee to the House.
Ordered, That the Chair make the Report to the House.
Ordered, That embargoed copies of the Report be made available (Standing Order No.
134).
[Adjourned till Monday 19 April at 3.00 pm.

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

57

Witnesses (2017–19 session)
The following witnesses gave evidence. Transcripts can be viewed on the inquiry publications
page of the Committee’s website.

Tuesday 2 July 2019
Chris Stark, Chief Executive, Committee on Climate Change; Professor Nick
Robins, Professor in Practice for Sustainable Finance, Grantham Research
Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, London School of Economics;
and Sagarika Chatterjee, Director of Climate Change, Principles for Responsible
Investment

Q1–66

Wednesday 8 October 2019
Rachel Haworth, UK Policy Manager, ShareAction, Bruce Davis, Joint Managing
Director, Abundance Investment, and Simon Howard, Chief Executive, UK
Sustainable Investment and Finance Association

Q67–115

58

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Published written evidence (2017–19
session)
The following written evidence was received by the Treasury Committee in the previous
Parliament (2017–19 session) and can be viewed on the inquiry publications page of the
Committee’s website.
1

Aberdeen Standard Investments (DUE0041)

2

ADS Group (DUE0021)

3

Airlines UK (DUE0051)

4

Aldersgate Group (DUE0018)

5

Anaerobic Digestion and Bioresources Association (DUE0014)

6

Anglian Water Services (DUE0038)

7

Anglo American (DUE0077)

8

Association for Decentralised Energy (DUE0033)

9

Association of British Insurers (DUE0070)

10

Aviva plc (DUE0048)

11

Bank of England (DUE0093)

12

Barclays (DUE0045)

13

Biofuelwatch (DUE0091)

14

Hartwell, Christopher A., Professor of Financial Systems Resilience, Bournemouth
University (DUE0005)

15

Building Societies Association (DUE0084)

16

BYD UK Co Ltd (DUE0032)

17

Cadent (DUE0022)

18

Campaign for Better Transport (DUE0116)

19

Carbon Tracker Initiative (DUE0008)

20

CDP (DUE0086)

21

Centre for Energy Policy, University of Strathclyde (DUE0007)

22

ChargePoint (DUE0088)

23

Chemical Industries Association (DUE0043)

24

Christian Aid (DUE0031)

25

CIMA (DUE0098)

26

City of London Corporation (DUE0063)

27

ClientEarth (DUE0036)

28

Community Energy England (DUE0059)

29

Cyan Finance (DUE0054)

30

DNV GL (DUE0053)

31

Drax Group plc (DUE0050)

32

E.ON (DUE0055)

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

33

E3G (DUE0101)

34

Eaton (DUE0026)

35

EDF Energy (DUE0075)

36

Electricity North West Limited (DUE0024)

37

Energy and Utilities Alliance (DUE0049)

38

Energy Efficiency Infrastructure Group (DUE0083)

39

Energy Networks Association (DUE0066)

40

Energy UK (DUE0028)

41

Extinction Rebellion Oxford (DUE0030)

42

Finance & Leasing Association (DUE0108)

43

Financial Conduct Authority (DUE0099)

44

Glennmont Partners (DUE0016)

45

Global Witness (DUE0019)

46

Global Witness (DUE0064)

47

Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment, London
School of Economics (DUE0076)

48

Greater London Authority (DUE0109)

49

Green Alliance (DUE0039)

50

Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth, RSPB (DUE0027)

51

Highview Power (DUE0069)

52

HSBC Holdings (DUE0079)

53

Dunn, Hugo (DUE0087)

54

ICAEW (DUE0065)

55

Institute and Faculty of Actuaries (DUE0029)

56

Institute for Strategy, Resilience & Security, University College London (DUE0040)

57

The Independent Renewable Energy Generators Group (DUE0042)

58

ISS ESG (DUE0009)

59

Kingspan Insulation Ltd (DUE0025)

60

Liquid Gas UK (DUE0056)

61

Lloyd’s (DUE0103)

62

Loan Market Association (DUE0037)

63

London Stock Exchange Group (DUE0058)

64

Low Carbon (DUE0104)

65

Mineral Products Association (DUE0046)

66

Mirova/Natixis Investment Managers (DUE0106)

67

Scharf, Mr Daniel (DUE0003)

68

Haas, Ms Jill (DUE0006)

69

National Energy Action (DUE0035)

59

60

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

70

National Grid (DUE0100)

71

ODI (DUE0080)

72

Oil & Gas UK (DUE0034)

73

Oil Change International (DUE0061)

74

Orsted (DUE0073)

75

OVO Group (DUE0012)

76

Oxford Climate Lobby (DUE0013)

77

Oxford Sustainable Finance Programme, University of Oxford (DUE0060)

78

PIMFA (DUE0081)

79

Platform (DUE0010)

80

Plenitude (DUE0015)

81

Positive Money (DUE0062)

82

Principles for Responsible Investment (DUE0089)

83

Grubb, Professor Michael (DUE0114)

84

Jackson, Professor Tim (DUE0074)

85

Project Heather (DUE0082)

86

RBS (DUE0057)

87

ROCKWOOL Ltd (DUE0020)

88

Ruffer LLP (DUE0094)

89

Ryse Hydrogen (DUE0095)

90

ScottishPower (DUE0090)

91

SGN (DUE0067)

92

ShareAction (DUE0096)

93

Shell UK Ltd (DUE0047)

94

Solar Trade Association (DUE0092)

95

Storelectric Ltd (DUE0001)

96

Storelectric Ltd (DUE0002)

97

Sustainable Aviation (DUE0112)

98

Sustainable Energy Association (DUE0078)

99

The Confederation of British Industry (DUE0110)

100

The Crown Estate (DUE0115)

101

The Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment
(DUE0105)

102

The Investment Association (DUE0071)

103

The Mineral Wool Insulation Manufacturers Association (MIMA) (DUE0097)

104

The Natural History Museum (DUE0017)

105

UK Finance (DUE0011)

106

UK Green Building Council (DUE0023)

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

107

UK Power Networks (DUE0072)

108

UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association (DUE0044)

109

Veolia (DUE0085)

110

WWF (DUE0068)

111

Zurich Insurance (DUE0052)

61

62

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

Witnesses (2019–21 session)
The following witnesses gave evidence. Transcripts can be viewed on the inquiry publications
page of the Committee’s website.

Tuesday 10 March 2020
Libby Peake, Head of Resource Policy, Green Alliance; The Baroness Worthington,
Crossbench Life Peer; Nick Molho, Executive Director, Aldersgate Group; The
Lord Turner of Ecchinswell, Chairman, Energy Transitions Commission

Q1–59

Wednesday 9 September 2020
Professor Nick Robins, Professor in Practice for Sustainable Finance, Grantham
Research Institute, LSE; Dr Emily Shuckburgh OBE, Director, Cambridge Zero,
University of Cambridge; Chris Cummings, CEO, Investment Association; Daniel
Klier, Group Head of Sustainable Finance, HSBC

Q60–109

Wednesday 30 September 2020
Sheldon Mills, Interim Executive Director of Strategy and Competition, Financial
Conduct Authority; Sarah Breeden, Executive Director for UK Deposit Takers
Supervision, Prudential Regulation Authority; Anthony Raymond, General
Counsel and Director of Legal Services, Policy and Advisory Directorate, The
Pensions Regulator

Q110–182

Wednesday 14 October 2020
Saker Nusseibeh, CEO, Federated Hermes International; Sandra Boss, Global
Head of Investment Stewardship, BlackRock; Huw Evans, Director General,
Association of British Insurers; Steve Waygood, Chief Responsible Investment
Officer, Aviva

Q183–235

Monday 16 November 2020
John Glen MP, Economic Secretary, HM Treasury; Kemi Badenoch MP, Exchequer
Secretary, HM Treasury; Niva Thiruchelvam, Deputy Director, Head of Net Zero
Review, Enterprise and Growth Unit, HM Treasury; Richard Knox, Director,
Financial Services Group, HM Treasury
Q236–330

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

63

Published written evidence (2019–21
session)
The following written evidence was received and can be viewed on the inquiry publications
page of the Committee’s website.
DEC numbers are generated by the evidence processing system and so may not be complete.
1

361 Community Energy (DEC0090)

2

ACTion on Climate for Teignbridge (DEC0106)

3

ADS Group (DEC0022)

4

Airlines UK (DEC0021)

5

Alstom UK & Ireland (DEC0116)

6

Anaerobic Digestion and Bioresources Association (ADBA) (DEC0056)

7

Angel Trains (DEC0049)

8

Anonymous (DEC0111)

9

Anonymous (DEC0105)

10

Anonymous (DEC0100)

11

Anonymous (DEC0008)

12

Arcadis (DEC0113)

13

Association of British Insurers (DEC0121)

14

Association of British Insurers (DEC0067)

15

Aviva (DEC0086)

16

Barclays (DEC0052)

17

Barraclough, Mr Chris (Property director, Hutton Estates Consultancy Limited)
(DEC0025)

18

Baxi Heating UK (DEC0110)

19

BlackRock (DEC0123)

20

Budweiser Brewing Group (DEC0118)

21

CIA (DEC0018)

22

Campaign for Better Transport (DEC0082)

23

Chargepoint (DEC0012)

24

Chemical Industries Association (DEC0028)

25

ClientEarth (DEC0016)

26

Community Energy England (DEC0091)

27

Community Union (DEC0102)

28

Confederation of British Industry (DEC0015)

29

E.ON (DEC0030)

30

E3G (DEC0051)

31

EDF (DEC0010)

64

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

32

Energy Networks Association (DEC0098)

33

Energy UK (DEC0101)

34

Federated Hermes International (DEC0124)

35

Federation of Master Builders (DEC0044)

36

Finance & Leasing Association (DEC0029)

37

Glennmont Partners (DEC0027)

38

Global Warming Policy Foundation (DEC0009)

39

Global Witness (DEC0059)

40

Grantham Research Institute, LSE (DEC0117)

41

Greener practice (DEC0085)

42

Greenpeace UK (DEC0013)

43

Ground Source Heat Pump Association (GSHPA) (DEC0042)

44

HSBC (DEC0119)

45

HSBC Holdings plc (DEC0066)

46

Haringey Labour Climate Action (HLCA) (DEC0043)

47

Heat Pump Federation; and Ground Source Heat Pump Association (DEC0040)

48

Hydrogen Strategy Now campaign (DEC0047)

49

Icebreaker One (DEC0048)

50

Institution of Civil Engineers (DEC0019)

51

Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change (DEC0035)

52

Investment Association (DEC0074)

53

Kensa Group (DEC0064)

54

Kingdom (DEC0039)

55

Kingspan Insulation (DEC0078)

56

Knight, Cedric (DEC0092)

57

Legal and General Group Plc (DEC0120)

58

Liquid Gas UK (DEC0061)

59

Local Authority Pension Fund Forum (DEC0033)

60

Local Government Association (DEC0070)

61

London Councils (DEC0097)

62

London Sustainable Development Commission (DEC0063)

63

Mineral Products Association (DEC0036)

64

Mineral Wool Insulation Manufacturers Association (MIMA) (DEC0055)

65

Muswell Hill & Hornsey Friends of the Earth; Central Lancashire Friends of the Earth;
East Dorset Friends of the Earth; Hammersmith & Fulham Friends of the Earth;
Sheffield Friends of the Earth; Tottenham and Wood Green Friends of the Earth;
Sustainable Thornbury; Transition Black Isle; Transition Highbury; and Transition
Exmouth (DEC0108)

66

National Grid (DEC0080)

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

67

North Devon cycling campaign group (DEC0057)

68

Nuclear Industry Association (DEC0073)

69

OGUK (DEC0094)

70

Octopus Group (DEC0017)

71

ONeill, Dr Finola and Ms Zoe Griffiths (DEC0076)

72

Oxford Climate Lobby (DEC0007)

73

Peiser, Dr Benny (Director, Global Warming Policy Foundation) (DEC0122)

74

Pension and Lifetime Savings Association (DEC0002)

75

Positive Money (DEC0060)

76

Price, Dr Martin (DEC0032)

77

Responsible Finance (DEC0031)

78

Riggulsford, Mr Myc (DEC0096)

79

Royal Institute of British Architects (DEC0020)

80

SERA Devon (DEC0041)

81

SSE plc (DEC0046)

82

Scharf, Daniel (Consultant, PfT Planning) (DEC0006)

83

ScottishPower (DEC0112)

84

ShareAction (DEC0079)

85

Solar Trade Association (DEC0034)

86

Standard Life Aberdeen (DEC0095)

87

Storelectric Limited (DEC0005)

88

Sunswap (DEC0109)

89

Sustain: the alliance for better food and farming (DEC0072)

90

Sustainable Crediton (DEC0103)

91

Tetra Pak (DEC0075)

92

The Financial Conduct Authority (DEC0001)

93

UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose (IIPP) (DEC0065)

94

UK Finance (DEC0068)

95

UK Sustainable Investment & Finance Association (DEC0093)

96

UK Women’s Budget Group (DEC0011)

97

UKHospitality (DEC0062)

98

WWF UK (DEC0054)

99

Walker, Mrs Glynis (DEC0089)

100

Watson, John (DEC0104)

101

Westcott, Dr Gill (Co-Chair, Transition Exeter) (DEC0115)

102

Yarrow, Ms Stella; Ms Alexandra Munns; and 745 additional Extinction Rebellion
activists (DEC0114)

103

Yeoh, Benjamin (DEC0037)

65

66

Net zero and the Future of Green Finance

List of Reports from the Committee
during the current Parliament
All publications from the Committee are available on the publications page of the
Committee’s website.

Session 2019–21
Number

Title

Reference

1st

Appointment of Andrew Bailey as Governor of the Bank
of England

HC 122

2nd

Economic impact of coronavirus: Gaps in support

HC 454

3rd

Appointment of Richard Hughes as the Chair of the Office
for Budget Responsibility

HC 618

4th

Appointment of Jonathan Hall to the Financial Policy
Committee

HC 621

5th

Reappointment of Andy Haldane to the Monetary Policy
Committee

HC 620

6th

Reappointment of Professor Silvana Tenreyro to the
Monetary Policy Committee

HC 619

7th

Appointment of Nikhil Rathi as Chief Executive of the
Financial Conduct Authority

HC 622

8th

Economic impact of coronavirus: the challenges of
recovery

HC 271

9th

The appointment of John Taylor to the Prudential
Regulation Committee

HC 1132

10th

The appointment of Antony Jenkins to the Prudential
Regulation Committee

HC 1157

11th

Economic impact of coronavirus: gaps in support and
economic analysis

HC 882

12th

Tax after coronavirus

HC 664

1st Special

IT Failures in the financial services sector: Government and
Regulators’ Response to the Committee’s Second Report
of 2019

HC 114

2nd Special

Economic Crime: Consumer View: Government and
Regulators’ Responses to Committee’s Third Report of
Session 2019

HC 91

3rd Special

Economic impact of coronavirus: Gaps in support:
Government Response to the Committee’s Second Report
of Session 2019–21

HC 662

4th Special

Economic impact of coronavirus: Gaps in support: Further
Government Response

HC 749

5th Special

Economic impact of coronavirus: the challenges of
recovery: Government Response to the Committee’s
Eighth Report of Session 2019–21

HC 999

